Title: S2-CAR: Segmentation-Supervised Complexity-Adaptive Recommendation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.25415v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 00:32:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# S2-CAR: Segmentation-Supervised Complexity-Adaptive Recommendation 

Linjiang Guo a, Nitin Bisht a, Shiqing Wu b, Xianzhi Wang a, Guandong Xu c, ∗

> aUniversity of Technology Sydney, 15 Broadway, Ultimo, 2007, NSW, Australia
> bCity University of Macau, Avenida Padre Tomás Pereira, Taipa, Macau SAR, China
> cThe Education University of Hong Kong, 10 Lo Ping Road, Tai Po, New Territories, Hong Kong SAR, China

Abstract 

Sequential recommendation aims to predict user preferences from interaction histories, yet existing models often struggle when behavior patterns become complex and hetero-geneous. A key reason is that interaction histories are rarely uniform: users’ interests shift in a latent way over time, yet existing models either treat the full sequence as a homogeneous context or rely on rigid time-window segmentation that misaligns with true intent boundaries. This mis-segmentation not only introduces cross-intent inter-ference at intermediate sequence positions but also leads to over-reliance on short-term interest signals. To address this, we propose S2-CAR , a segmentation-supervised and complexity-adaptive framework for sequential recommendation that models user intent as a continuous latent energy state. Specifically, it uses the Context-Aware Soft Tem-poral Point Process (Soft-TPP) to segment boundaries triggered by the natural decay of latent-state energy rather than fixed intervals, enabling intent segmentation without fixed time-gap rules. Next, upon this segmentation, a Segment-Count-Adaptive Multi-Intent Extraction module hierarchically aggregates intent-coherent segments into a com-pact set of multi-interest representations. Extensive experiments on 3 representative public benchmark datasets spanning movie, e-commerce, and gaming domains across 13 baselines demonstrate that S2-CAR consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods across all datasets and metrics. Further analysis shows that the proposed energy-based segmentation serves as a plug-and-play module, yielding consistent improvements when integrated into existing sequential recommendation backbones. 

Keywords: Sequential Recommendation; Temporal Point Process; Intent Segmentation; Contrastive Learning 

1. Introduction 

Sequential recommendation aims to predict a user’s next interaction by modeling their behavior history (Fang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2025). Modeling long be-havior sequences has become increasingly important for capturing both recent interests and long-range preferences, given the rapid growth of user activity on modern plat-forms. Existing sequential recommendation models, such as recurrent architectures (e.g., GRU4Rec (Hidasi et al., 2015)) and self-attention-based methods (e.g., SASRec (Kang   

> ∗Corresponding author. Email: gdxu@eduhk.hk
> Email address: gdxu@eduhk.hk (Guandong Xu)
> arXiv:2606.25415v1 [cs.IR] 24 Jun 2026

and McAuley, 2018) and BERT4Rec (Sun et al., 2019)), have achieved strong performance by learning item-transition patterns from historical interactions. Despite their effective-ness, they often struggle when sequences become long and behavior patterns become increasingly complex. As illustrated in Figure 1a, a key reason is that long interaction histories are rarely homogeneous, with users’ interests often shifting rapidly, leading to a noisy collaborative signal. Conversely, user preferences sometimes persist across temporal sessions, resulting in context dilution. Under such scenarios, existing models can blur the distinction between genuine recent intent and irrelevant or repeated historical signals. To empirically validate this problem, we conduct an empirical study using SASRec as a representative sequential backbone, in which we randomly remove half of the items from either the last segment (as a proxy for short-term interest) or the middle segment (as a proxy for long-term interest) of each user’s interaction history, and evaluate the resulting change in sequential recommendation performance in terms of recommendation metric, i.e., Recall@10. Interestingly, as illustrated in Figure 1b, two key observations emerge. First, for a subset of users, deleting items from the middle segment does not degrade performance; instead, it even improves it. This observation suggests a phenomenon: existing models are insensitive to middle-segment content, and this insensitivity becomes more pronounced as sequence length increases. Whether this stems from cross-intent noise accumulated in the middle portion, or from boundary definition errors inherent in the fixed segmentation used to construct the experiment, both explanations converge on the same underlying failure: existing models systematically under-utilize interaction signals embedded in the middle of long sequences. We later revisit this protocol in Section 4.10 to evaluate whether the proposed model resolves this limitation. Second, deleting items from the last segment results in consistent, increasingly severe performance degradation as sequence length increases, indicating that existing models remain heavily reliant on short-term signals. Together, these findings suggest that the core challenge in sequential recommendation is not merely the attenuation of early interactions over time, but the absence of a principled mechanism for identifying genuine intent boundaries, without which models cannot reliably distinguish informative historical signals from irrelevant or redundant ones. Recently, some papers have tried to mitigate this issue. Hierarchical methods (Quad-rana et al., 2017; Sharma et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025) attempt to partition the in-teraction sequence into sub-sessions before modeling. Similarly, segmentation strategies typically rely on fixed (e.g., 30-minute) gap-based (Ludewig and Jannach, 2018; Wang et al., 2021), token-similarity-based fragment reorganization (Li et al., 2024), or multi-intent projection (Choi et al., 2024) and aggregation mechanisms (Long et al., 2025). However, these approaches share a common limitation: their segmentation criteria are largely heuristic and are defined independently of the user’s actual behavioral dynamics. In the real world, such strategies frequently fail because they conflate temporal distance with co-occurrence divergence, causing asynchronous intent shifts to be mishandled. For example, a user may revisit the same intent after a long pause or switch interests within a short session. Additionally, existing multi-interest modules usually allocate a uniform slot capacity to all segments, ignoring that segments can differ substantially in temporal span and internal uncertainty. To solve this, we propose our novel framework: Segmentation-Supervised Hierarchical Multi-Intent Network with Complexity-Adaptive Regularization S2-CAR . However, we face the following technical challenges: (1) how to infer intent boundaries from behavioral dynamics rather than fixed temporal-window rules; (2) how to compactly represent re-2Category Change within fixed Interval           

> Single Continuous Interest
> Segment N+1 Segment N
> Fixed Temporal Segment
> Persistent
> [Appliance] [Electronics] [Appliance]
> User Interest:
> User Interest:
> [Appliance]
> [Apparel] [Apparel] [Apparel] [Apparel] [Apparel]
> Category
> Transition
> H10 H11 H10 H11 H12
> Non-p ersistent [Electronics]
> H10 H13 H12 H70 H70

(a) Two toy failure modes of fixed temporal segmentation: missed intent transitions within a segment and artificial split-ting of a persistent interest across segments. H denotes the timestamp of interactions (in hours). 17-46   

> 47-76
> 77-106
> 107-136
> 137-166
> 167-196
> 197-226
> Sequence Length Group (short long)
> Recall@10
> 0
> Removal in Last segment Removal in Middle segment

(b) Performance impact of random item deletion from the last segment (short-term interest proxy) and middle segment (long-term interest proxy) across sequence length groups, measured by ∆ Recall@10 (deleted sequence minus original sequence; positive values indicate improvement after dele-tion, and negative values indicate degradation). 

Figure 1: Limitations of fixed temporal segmentation in sequential recommendation. 

curring and heterogeneous interests without allocating redundant capacity; and (3) how to regularize sequential representations with segment-level structure without sacrificing inference-time causal fidelity. To answer this, we first partition the continuous interaction stream into behaviorally coherent segments. We introduce a Context-Aware Soft Tempo-ral Point Process that models the user’s latent intent as a continuous-time energy state decaying between interactions. A segment boundary is triggered only when the energy retention ratio falls below a dataset-specific threshold, resulting in task-specific intent segments without manually annotated boundary labels. Next, to compress K intent seg-ments into a compact set of interest slots that adapts to segment complexity, we propose a Segment-Count-Adaptive Multi-Intent Extraction module, where a compression ratio 

ρ consolidates cross-segment redundancy caused by periodic behavioral recurrence and prevents capacity waste in the interest representation. Finally, to bridge the structural gap between fine-grained sequential representations and globally balanced multi-interest representations, we design a Hierarchical Interest Encoder that serves as a contrastive supervision path, aligning the two complementary views via a contrastive loss without degrading inference-time sequential fidelity. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: 

• We propose a Context-Aware Soft-TPP for unsupervised energy-based intent seg-mentation. The resulting boundary flags guide downstream modules without requir-ing manually annotated boundary labels, replacing rigid fixed-window partitioning strategies while remaining fully compatible with end-to-end training pipelines. 

• We introduce a Segment-Count-Adaptive Multi-Intent Extraction mechanism that adaptively gates the number of active interest slots according to segment count and consolidates periodic cross-segment redundancy using a validation-selected com-pression ratio ρ.

• We further design a decoupled Hierarchical Interest Encoder that provides struc-turally balanced supervision during training and regularizes the Sequential Inference Encoder via contrastive loss. 

• We conduct extensive experiments on three representative public benchmark datasets (movie, e-commerce, and gaming domains) against 13 baselines, demonstrating that 3S2-CAR consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance, with particularly signif-icant gains for users with long and complex interaction histories. 

2. Related Work 

2.1. Sequential Recommendation 

Sequential recommendation aims to model the dynamic evolution of user preferences by leveraging chronologically ordered interaction histories to predict the next item of interest (Wang et al., 2021). Early work in this area employed recurrent neural networks to capture temporal dependencies: GRU4Rec (Hidasi et al., 2015) introduced session-parallel mini-batching with gated recurrent units, while Caser (Tang and Wang, 2018) reframed the problem as image recognition by applying convolutional filters over a sliding window of recent item embeddings to capture short-range transition patterns. The advent of the Transformer architecture brought a significant paradigm shift. SASRec (Kang and McAuley, 2018) demonstrated that a lightweight unidirectional self-attention mechanism could outperform recurrent models by adaptively attending to relevant items across the full sequence. BERT4Rec (Sun et al., 2019) extended this line by adopting bidirectional attention with a cloze-style masked item prediction objective, enriching item representa-tions with both left- and right-context signals. Despite their strong empirical performance on standard benchmarks, these methods share a weakness when applied to long interaction sequences. The autoregressive ag-gregation chain inherent to both recurrent and attention-based encoders progressively attenuates the influence of early interactions, causing relevant historical interactions to be buried in the middle of long sequences. This issue is analogous to the ’Lost-in-the-Middle’ phenomenon observed in large language models (Liu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024), where critical context positioned in the middle of a long input tends to be system-atically under-utilized by autoregressive decoders. To alleviate the resulting noise and intent ambiguity in long interaction sequences, several methods introduce session-based segmentation as a preprocessing step. TL-SRec (Chen et al., 2022) adopts a fixed time-gap threshold to split sequences into sub-sessions, while other approaches apply sliding windows of fixed length (Tang and Wang, 2018; Qin et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025). However, these segmentation criteria are defined independently of the user’s actual behavioral dynamics: fixed windows are insensitive to asynchronous intent shifts, and raw time-gap thresholds conflate temporal distance with co-occurrence divergence, as a user may revisit the same intent after a prolonged pause or transition to a new interest within a single short session. 

2.2. Multi-Interest Recommendation 

A single vector representation is often insufficient to capture the heterogeneous and evolving nature of user preferences, motivating a line of research on multi-interest model-ing (Deng and Hu, 2024; Li et al., 2025; Lv et al., 2025). Early work in this direction, such as MIND (Li et al., 2019) and ComiRec (Cen et al., 2020), introduced capsule routing and multi-head attention mechanisms, respectively, to extract a fixed set of interest vectors from the full interaction history, where each vector encodes a stable, recurring preference pattern of the user. SINE (Tan et al., 2021) further improved scalability by sparsely activating only a subset of conceptual prototypes for each user, reducing the redundancy inherent in dense multi-interest representations. DSSRec (Ma et al., 2020) introduces latent self-supervision to disentangle multiple behavioral factors from the interaction 4sequence, enabling the model to separately represent and recombine independent user motivations. MiaSRec (Choi et al., 2024) augments the standard Transformer encoder with a multi-intent module that routes each item to several latent embeddings, allowing concurrent tracking of multiple evolving interests within a unified architecture. A related but distinct line of work focuses on modeling short-term user intent, i.e., the immediate behavioral goal driving a specific interaction session, rather than long-term interest patterns. NOVA (Liu et al., 2021a) introduces non-invasive self-supervised sig-nals to capture intent-level transitions without modifying the primary sequence encoder. ICSRec (Qin et al., 2024) decomposes interaction histories into intent-homogeneous sub-sequences through item clustering and applies contrastive learning at the intent level to explicitly align representations of sequences sharing the same underlying user purpose. Despite operating at different granularities, these approaches share two common lim-itations. First, they allocate a uniform number of interest slots across all users and sessions, ignoring the substantial variability in temporal span and behavioral complex-ity across different interaction phases. Next, they do not account for periodic intent recurrence, wherein the same short-term goal manifests repeatedly across non-adjacent sessions; without explicit consolidation, the same underlying interest is wastefully re-allocated to multiple redundant slots rather than being unified into a single compact representation. 

2.3. Temporal Point Process 

Temporal Point Processes (TPPs) provide a principled probabilistic framework for modeling the occurrence of discrete events in continuous time (Daley and Vere-Jones, 2003). Classical TPP models, including the Hawkes process (Hawkes, 1971) and its vari-ants, such as the self-correcting process (Isham and Westcott, 1979) and the mutually ex-citing multivariate Hawkes process, capture self-exciting or inhibitory dynamics through parametric intensity kernels, but rely on functional forms that limit their expressiveness in complex real-world settings. Neural TPP models overcome this limitation by parameterizing the intensity function with recurrent or attention-based architectures. RMTPP (Du et al., 2016) first demon-strated that a recurrent neural network could jointly model event types and inter-event times by encoding the full event history into a continuous hidden state. NHP (Mei and Eisner, 2017) extended this line with a continuous-time LSTM that evolves the hidden state between events according to an exponential decay, enabling more faithful model-ing of the inter-event dynamics. Recent work further replaced recurrence with Neural TPP models, achieving strong performance on event streams such as financial transac-tions (Du et al., 2016), social network activities (Zhao et al., 2015), and electronic health records (Mei and Eisner, 2017). In the context of user behavior modeling, TPPs have been applied primarily to next-event time prediction, estimating when a user will next interact with the system. Coe-volving method (Wang et al., 2016) models the co-evolution of user and item states in continuous time using coupled point processes, capturing the mutual influence between user engagement and item popularity dynamics. THRNN (Vassøy et al., 2019) introduces a joint hierarchical RNN and a point process model that jointly models session-level and event-level dynamics, providing a closer connection to the session structure inherent in recommendation settings. TLSRec (Chen et al., 2022) incorporates inter-event intervals as auxiliary signals to modulate attention weights in a sequential encoder, improving sensitivity to temporal irregularity. However, it treats temporal information purely as 5MS-RoPE        

> ...
> ...
> Item
> Embedding
> Rotate
> Embedding
> <sin, cos>
> Temporal
> Category
> ...
> ...
> MLE
> Training
> Transformer
> Encoder
> SIE
> Context-Aware
> Soft-TPP
> Additive
> Attention
> Multi-interest
> Extraction
> HIE
> Segment
> Representation
> Number of
> Interest
> Cross
> Attention
> ...
> Max &  Mean
> Contrastive Loss
> Prediction
> ...
> 0.04 0.07 0.01 0.04 0.09 0.03
> Split Point
> ={}
> ...
> ...

Figure 2: Overview of our proposed framework. A frozen Soft-TPP model produces binary boundary flags from the raw interaction sequence. The Sequential Inference Encoder uses a boundary-aware causal Transformer with MS-RoPE to produce the user embedding ufor next-item scoring. The Hierarchical Interest Encoder builds segment-level multi-interest representations and provides a contrastive regular-ization signal. 

a feature rather than exploiting it as a generative mechanism for inferring latent in-tent structure. Our proposed method S2-CAR introduces a Soft-TPP that models the user’s latent intent as a scalar retention ratio governed by a context-adaptive ordinary differential equation; a segment boundary is triggered when the energy retention ratio drops below a dataset-specific threshold, yielding task-specific intent segments without manually annotated boundary labels or fixed time-gap rules. 

3. Methodology 

In this section, we introduce our novel framework (S2-CAR) , a Segmentation-Supervised Hierarchical Multi-Intent Network with Complexity-Adaptive Regularization. We begin by introducing the notations used in the paper, which are summarized in Table 1. Let U

and V denote the sets of users and items, respectively. For a user u, the interaction his-tory is a chronologically ordered sequence S = {(v1, c 1, t 1), (v2, c 2, t 2), . . . , (vN , c N , t N )},where vi ∈ V is the interacted item, ci is its category, and ti is the timestamp. The task is to predict the next item vN +1 given the sequence S.

3.1. Framework Overview 

A challenge in sequential recommendation is that a user’s intent is not static, as it shifts across different temporal phases of their interaction history. Existing methods either ignore these shifts entirely or rely on heuristic-selected fixed-length windows or raw time-gaps to partition the sequences (Chen et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2024). While fixed windows are insensitive to actual behavioral transitions, raw time-gaps are a poor proxy for intent boundaries (i.e., a user may return to the same interest after a long pause, or shift to an entirely different one within a single short session). To solve this, we treat intent as a continuous latent state that decays between interac-tions. A boundary is considered when the residual energy of the latent state drops below 6a threshold, indicating a genuine intent transition. This segmentation is learned using a temporal point process objective and then frozen, such that downstream modules always receive behaviorally coherent segments rather than arbitrary chunks. The overall frame-work (as illustrated in Figure 2) contains a Sequential Inference Encoder and a Hierarchi-cal Interest Encoder branch that share the same boundary-aware token representations but serve distinct roles. Firstly, a Context-Aware Soft Temporal Point Process (abbrevi-ated as Soft-TPP hereafter) model is pretrained to capture the continuous-time dynamics of user intent. After pretraining, it is frozen and used to produce binary boundary flags (Section 3.2). The Sequential Inference Encoder (Section 3.3) consists of a boundary-aware causal Transformer with Multi-Scale Rotary Position Embedding (MS-RoPE) that encodes the full item sequence and extracts the user embedding ufrom the last valid position. This embedding is directly used for next-item scoring. The Hierarchical Inter-est Encoder (Section 3.4) is an auxiliary training branch built on top of the SIE hidden states: it uses the frozen TPP boundary flags to aggregate token-level representations into segment-level representations, extracts multi-interest vectors via cross-attention, and provides a contrastive supervision signal during training. 

3.2. Context-Aware Soft-TPP 3.2.1. Continuous-Time Intent Dynamics 

To capture how user intent evolves between consecutive interactions, we model the latent intent as a d-dimensional energy vector e(t) ∈ Rd. The scalar event intensity λ(t) is defined as the squared ℓ2 norm of this vector, i.e., λ(t) = |e(t)|22. For boundary detection, we further derive a scalar retention ratio ri by averaging the per-dimension exponential retention values. Intuitively, e(t) reflects how strongly the current intent remains active over time. We define the latent state as: 

e(t) = exp( −δi(t − ti)) , (1) where δi ∈ Rd 

> +

is the dimension-wise decay rate, and the exponential is applied element-wise. At each event position i, the energy vector is reset to an all-ones vector e(ti) = 1d,modeling the assumption that a new interaction fully reactivates the current intent state before it begins to decay. Equivalently, e(t) satisfies the following ordinary differential equation: 

de(t)

dt = −δi ⊙ e(t), t ∈ (ti, t i+1 ), (2) 

3.2.2. Context-Adaptive Decay 

A key challenge in modeling real-world interaction sequences is that user intent does not shift at a uniform rate. Interactions exhibiting strong co-occurrence patterns should sustain the current latent state, whereas categorical divergence should accelerate its dis-sipation. A fixed decay rate cannot capture this variability. Moreover, the same local category transition may carry different semantic weight depending on the user’s long-term behavioral profile: a shift from Electronics to Appliances signals a stronger intent boundary for a user whose history is concentrated in a single domain than for one who habitually browses across diverse categories. We therefore introduce a Context-Adaptive Decay mechanism, where the dimension-wise decay rate δi is conditioned on the local cat-egory transition (ci−1, c i) and a user-level context vector ¯hci that summarizes the user’s 7historical category distribution up to position i:

δi = φ fδ

  hci ∥ hci−1 ∥ ¯hci

 + ϵ, 

¯hci = 1

i

> i

X

> j=1

hcj , (3) where hci , hci−1 ∈ Rd are the category embeddings of the i-th and (i−1) -th interactions obtained from category embeddings EC . For the first position, we set hc 

> 0

= 0 so that the initial transition context is well-defined without using any future information. ¯hci is the causal running mean of category embeddings up to position i, [ · ∥ · ] denotes vector concatenation. φ is the Softplus activation. fδ : R3d → Rd is a MLP, and ϵ = 10 −6 ensures strict positivity. The local transition pair (hci−1, hci ) provides a sharp, position-specific signal of categorical divergence, while ¯hci serves as a user-level modulator encoding the user’s long-term category distribution. 

3.2.3. Soft-TPP Formulation 

We initialize the Temporal Point Process framework with two design choices tailored to intent modeling. The event intensity is defined as the aggregate squared residual energy across all latent dimensions: 

λ(t) = 

> d

X

> k=1

e−2δi,k (t−ti) (4) where the per-dimension energy at time t is ek(t) = e−δi,k (t−ti) (Eq. (1)), and δi,k denotes the k-th element of the decay vector δi. The intensity can equivalently be written as 

λ(t) = Pdk=1 ek(t)2, i.e., the squared ℓ2 norm of the latent energy vector. This choice is motivated by two considerations. First, the quadratic decay rate makes λ(t) more sensitive to energy dissipation than a linear sum P 

> k

ek(t) would be, producing sharper boundary signals when the latent state approaches exhaustion. Second, it results in a compensator that enables efficient computation without numerical approximation: 

Λi =

Z ti+1 

> ti

λ(t) d t =

> d

X

> k=1

12δi,k 

 1 − e−2δi,k ∆ti , (5) This formulation encodes the intuition that a high-energy latent state indicates an active intent, making future interactions more likely, while a decayed state signals intent exhaustion. However, not all transitions should contribute equally to the likelihood: a cross-category jump reflects an intent shift rather than a continuation of the current tra-jectory. We therefore introduce a soft co-occurrence weight w(ci, c i+1 ) ∈ (0 , 1] that scales each event’s complete log-likelihood contribution according to categorical relatedness: 

w(ci, c i+1 ) = 

(

1 if ci = ci+1 

σ α · cos( hci , hci+1 ) otherwise (6) where α is a scaling factor and σ(·) is the sigmoid function. This weighted objective can be viewed as a likelihood reweighting scheme that adjusts the contribution of each observed transition while preserving the TPP likelihood structure (Ogata, 1978; Hu and Zidek, 2002). Intuitively, wi controls how much each observed transition contributes to 8the weighted likelihood, while the direction of the update for δi is still determined by the TPP likelihood and the context-adaptive decay network. The learned decay rates, together with the elapsed time ∆ti, determine the energy retention ratio ri used for boundary detection. Substituting Eq. (6) into the standard MLE objective gives the Soft-TPP loss: 

LTPP = − 1

|P| 

X

> i∈P

w(ci, c i+1 )

"

log λ(ti+1 ) −

> d

X

> k=1

12δi,k 

 1 − e−2δi,k ∆ti #

, (7) where P denotes valid (non-padding) positions, ∆ti = ti+1 − ti, λ(ti+1 ) = P 

> k

e−2δi,k ∆ti ,and the second term in the bracket is the compensator Λi defined in Eq. (5). 

3.2.4. Scale-Invariant Boundary Detection 

After the Soft-TPP module is trained and frozen, it serves purely as a boundary detector. Since the latent intent state e(t) ∈ Rd is a vector with per-dimension decay rates δi ∈ Rd, we define the Energy Retention Ratio as the mean of per-dimension exponential decay: 

ri = 1

d

> d

X

> k=1

exp( −δi,k · ∆ti), (8) where ∆ti = ti+1 − ti. A boundary is inserted before vi+1 when ri < τ , where τ ∈ (0 , 1) is a threshold hyperparameter. A lower τ requires more severe energy loss before declaring a new segment, yielding coarser segmentation, while a higher τ is more sensitive to minor intent shifts. 

3.2.5. Two-Stage Decoupled Training 

The TPP is trained in a fully unsupervised manner via maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) on the raw interaction history, without any manually annotated segment bound-aries. All Soft-TPP parameters are frozen in their entirety before main model training begins. The recommendation model maintains its own item embedding table and does not share trainable parameters with the frozen Soft-TPP module. The TPP-derived boundary flags are used as fixed structural inputs, but no gradient from the downstream recommendation objective is propagated back to the Soft-TPP. This parameter and gra-dient isolation prevents the segmentation criterion from being directly optimized toward the next-item loss during main training, since the two objectives can conflict. 

3.3. Sequential Inference Encoder (SIE) 

This path processes the full item sequence through a causal Transformer to produce the user embedding u used at inference. Boundary flags from the frozen TPP are injected as type embeddings, making the encoder structurally aware of intent transitions from the first layer without any architectural modifications to the attention mechanism. 

Boundary Type Embedding. The frozen Soft-TPP produces a binary boundary flag bi ∈{0, 1} for each position i, where bi = 1 marks the start of a new intent segment and bi = 0 

otherwise. These flags are fused into the item representation via a learnable boundary type embedding table EB ∈ R2×d:

˜hi = hvi + EB (bi), (9) 9where hvi = EV (vi) ∈ Rd is the embedding of item vi looked up from the item embedding table EV ∈ R|V|× d, and EB (bi) ∈ Rd is the corresponding boundary type vector, indicating whether the position is the boundary of the segment or not. This allows the encoder to be structurally aware of intent transitions from the first layer without any modification to the attention mechanism. 

Multi-Scale Rotary Position Embedding. The sequence {˜hi}Ni=1 is processed by a stack of L1 Transformer blocks, where at each block the query q(j) 

> i

, key k(j) 

> i

, and value v(j)

> i

vectors for head j are obtained via standard linear projections of ˜hi, each using multi-head self-attention with Multi-Scale Rotary Position Embedding. Since user interaction sequences exhibit dependencies over varying time scales, from short-term co-occurrence patterns to long-term preference drift, a single frequency scale is insufficient to capture positional relationships across all granularities. For attention head j, the base frequency is scaled by sj = 10 (j−1) /(H−1) drawn from a log-uniform grid over [1 , 10] :

θ(j) 

> k

= 1

sj

· 1

b2k/d h

, k = 1 , . . . , d h/2, (10) where b is the Rotary Position Embedding base and dh = d/H is the per-head dimen-sion. Rather than adding position embeddings to the input, MS-RoPE implicitly encodes positional information by rotating the query and key vectors inside each attention head, which guarantees their inner product only depends on the relative distance rather than absolute positions, thereby eliminating the positional bias in attention score computa-tion (Su et al., 2024). The sequence {˜hi}Ni=1 , stacked as X ∈ RN ×d, is processed by Transformer blocks. The attention output for head j is: 

Attn (j)(X) = softmax 

 R(j) 

> i

q(j)

> i

⊤ R(j) 

> l

k(j)

> l

 + Cil 

√dh

!

V(j),

R(j) 

> p

x 

> 2k−1:2 k

= cos pθ (j) 

> k

− sin pθ (j)

> k

sin pθ (j) 

> k

cos pθ (j)

> k

! x2k−1

x2k



, k = 1 , . . . , d h/2,

(11) where Cil = −∞ if i < l is the causal mask. By assigning a distinct frequency grid {θ(j) 

> k

}

to each head, MS-RoPE allows different heads to specialize in positional dependencies at different granularities from fine-grained short-term co-occurrence to coarse-grained long-term preference drift. Each block further applies a standard residual connection and position-wise feed-forward network. The layer-normalized output of the final block is 

H = [ h1, . . . , hN ] ∈ RN ×d, shared by all downstream modules. The hidden state at the last position is taken as the user’s sequential preference representation: u = hN .

3.4. Hierarchical Interest Encoder (HIE) 

The Sequential Inference Encoder’s causal readout at the last position hN captures fine-grained sequential dependencies but carries a structural bias: early segments exert progressively attenuated influence through the autoregressive aggregation chain. The Hierarchical Interest Encoder addresses this complementary weakness by constructing a segment-level representation in which each intent phase contributes equally, independent of its temporal distance from the current position. Crucially, the Hierarchical Interest Encoder’s output z serves as a structurally balanced supervision signal to regularize the representational geometry of u, and is discarded at inference to preserve the fine-grained sequential fidelity of the Sequential Inference Encoder. 10 Hierarchical Segment Representation. Given boundary flags, items are assigned to seg-ments via cumulative summation: seg( i) = P 

> j≤i

bj , yielding K segments {s1, . . . , s K }.Each segment sk is summarized by a learned additive attention: 

pk = X

> i∈sk

αihi, αi = exp( w⊤hi/√d)

P 

> j∈sk

exp( w⊤hj /√d), (12) where w ∈ Rd is a learned query vector. This pooling step deliberately discards intra-segment sequential order, producing a segment matrix P = [ p1, . . . , pK ] ∈ RK×d in which every segment occupies a structurally equivalent slot. P is then passed through L2

Transformer blocks with MS-RoPE and a causal mask, capturing the temporal evolution of intent across segments and producing refined representations P′ ∈ RK×d.

Segment-Count-Adaptive Multi-Intent Extraction. User behavior within a session is rarely driven by a single motive. We extract Umax interest-specific summaries from P′ via cross-attention with Umax orthogonally-initialized learnable interest queries Q = [ q1, . . . , qUmax ] ∈

RUmax ×d:

mr = CrossAttn( qr, P′), r = 1 , . . . , U max (13) Each interest query attends to all K segment representations, allowing the aggregated multi-interest vector to integrate evidence from the full interaction history and thereby serve as a globally-informed teacher signal for the causal Sequential Inference Encoder. Since the number of segments K reflects the diversity of behavioral phases, it provides a natural upper bound on the number of distinct user interests. However, K tends to overestimate the true number of interest types, as the same intent can recur periodically across non-adjacent segments. We therefore gate the number of active interest slots by a compression ratio ρ ∈ (0 , 1] :

Ueff = min( ⌈ρK ⌉ , U max ) , (14) where ρ controls the degree of slot compression relative to segment count. Setting ρ = 1 

allocates one slot per segment; smaller values consolidate capacity when periodic interest recurrence is expected. Given Ueff , we select the most activated slots from the Umax 

candidates rather than retaining them by index order. Intuitively, an interest vector with a larger ℓ2 norm has attended more selectively to specific segments, whereas a near-zero norm indicates that the corresponding query failed to aggregate any coherent behavioral signal and should be suppressed. We select the Ueff slots with the largest ℓ2 norms, i.e., A = {r : ∥mr∥2 ranks in top-Ueff }. Acompact interest-level user representation is obtained by combining element-wise max-pooling and mean-pooling over the active slots, where max-pooling captures the most salient interest signal in each dimension across slots and mean-pooling retains the overall interest distribution: 

z = MaxPool elem  

> r∈A

(mr) + 1

Ueff 

X

> r∈A

mr (15) where [MaxPool elem  

> r∈A

(mr)] ℓ = max r∈A [mr]ℓ for each feature dimension ℓ.

Interest Diversity Regularization. Although the interest queries Q are orthogonally ini-tialized, soft cross-attention does not prevent the active interest vectors {mr}Ueff  

> r=1

from collapsing toward a common direction during training, which would cause z to degener-ate into a single-interest representation and undermine its role as a structurally balanced 11 teacher signal for the contrastive objective. To prevent this, we introduce a lightweight diversity regularizer on the ℓ2-normalized active interest matrix ˜M ∈ RUeff ×d:

Ldiv = ˜M ˜M⊤ − I 2

> F

, (16) where ˜mr = mr/∥mr∥ and I ∈ RUeff ×Ueff is the identity matrix. This loss penalizes pairwise cosine similarity between interest vectors, encouraging them to remain approxi-mately orthogonal and thereby preserving the multi-interest expressiveness of z.

3.5. Model Optimization 

We now describe the training objectives. In what follows, a batch contains B users; subscript i indexes users within the batch. For the i-th user, the Sequential Inference Encoder produces ui = hNi and the Hierarchical Interest Encoder produces zi.

Recommendation Loss. Let EV ∈ R|V|× d be the item embedding matrix, where each row corresponds to an item vector. The prediction score distribution over all candidate items is: 

ˆyi = Softmax( EV ui) (17) The recommendation loss is then defined as the full cross-entropy between the pre-dicted distribution and the one-hot ground-truth label: 

LCE = −

> |V|

X

> v=1

¯yv log(ˆ yv), (18) where ¯yv = 1 only for the target item and 0 otherwise, and the sum is over all items in the catalog V. No sampled negatives or in-batch candidate approximation are used. 

Contrastive Regularization Loss. The multi-interest representation zi from the Hierarchi-cal Interest Encoder and the sequential user embedding ui from the Sequential Inference Encoder constitute two complementary views of the same user state: ui captures fine-grained autoregressive dependencies, while zi provides a structurally balanced summary across all intent phases (see §3.4). We align them with a contrastive loss using in-batch negatives. Let ˜ui = ui/∥ui∥ and ˜zi = zi/∥zi∥ denote the ℓ2-normalized representations of the 

i-th user from the Sequential Inference Encoder and the Hierarchical Interest Encoder, respectively. The contrastive loss is: 

LCL = − 1

B

> B

X

> i=1

log exp  ˜u⊤ 

> i

˜zi / η PBj=1 exp  ˜u⊤ 

> i

˜zj / η , (19) where η is a temperature hyperparameter. Each user’s sequential representation ˜ui is treated as the anchor, with the corresponding multi-interest representation ˜zi as the positive and all other ˜zj (j̸ = i) as in-batch negatives. Gradients from LCL flow simulta-neously into the Sequential Inference Encoder (through ui) and the Hierarchical Interest Encoder (through zi), imposing cross-path geometric regularization without altering the inference-time computation. 12 Algorithm 1 Training Procedure of S2-CAR 

Input: Chronologically split prefixes Strain , Sval , Stest ; item set V; category set C

Output: Best model parameters Θ∗ 

> 1:

Initialize Soft-TPP parameters ΘTPP = {EC , f δ} 

> 2:

Train ΘTPP on Strain by minimizing LTPP in Eq. (7); freeze ΘTPP  

> 3:

Initialize recommendation parameters Θ = {ΘSIE , ΘHIE } and set Θ∗ ← Θ 

> 4:

repeat  

> 5:

for each training prefix S ∈ S train do  

> 6:

Generate boundary flags {bi} using the frozen Soft-TPP  

> 7:

Obtain u from the SIE and z from the HIE  

> 8:

Update Θ by minimizing LCE + γLCL + βLdiv  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

Update Θ∗ if metrics on Sval improve  

> 11:

until early stopping is triggered  

> 12:

return Θ∗

Joint Training. The final training loss combines the recommendation loss, the contrastive regularizer, and the interest diversity regularizer: 

L = LCE + γ LCL + β Ldiv , (20) where γ controls the strength of the contrastive regularizer and β controls the diversity penalty. Note that Ldiv operates only on the Hierarchical Interest Encoder, whereas LCL 

aligns the Sequential Inference Encoder and the Hierarchical Interest Encoder during training. Both auxiliary objectives are discarded at inference, incurring no additional cost during serving. 

3.6. Complexity Analysis 

Algorithm 1 presents the training procedure for the proposed S2-CAR. The model follows a two-stage design: the Soft-TPP is first pretrained to capture continuous-time intent dynamics and then frozen, after which boundary flags are used to guide both encoders in the main training loop. To avoid split leakage under leave-one-out evaluation, Soft-TPP pretraining uses only the training prefixes. During validation and testing, the frozen Soft-TPP generates boundary flags only from adjacent interactions within the visible prefix of the corresponding split; the held-out target item’s identity, timestamp, and category are not used to compute intervals, co-occurrence weights, or boundary flags. In particular, no boundary is generated from the interval between the last visible item and the held-out target. The SIE processes the visible item sequence to produce a fine-grained sequential user embedding, while the HIE constructs a hierarchically balanced multi-interest representation as a contrastive supervision signal. We analyze the computational complexity of S2-CAR. Given embedding dimension 

d, sequence length N , number of segments K, maximum interest slots Umax , and catalog size |V| , the Soft-TPP incurs O(N · d) per sequence and is pretrained once and frozen, contributing no cost to the main training loop. The SIE applies L1 Transformer blocks over the full sequence, yielding O(N 2 · d) (with L1 absorbed as a small constant). MS-RoPE adds linear rotation operations over query and key vectors in each head, which are absorbed into the Transformer constant when the number of heads is fixed. The HIE operates on K segment vectors where K ≪ N , with a segment-level Transformer costing 13 Table 1: Summary of Notations 

Notation Description 

U, V Sets of users and items 

S = {(vi, c i, t i)}Ni=1 Chronologically ordered interaction history of a user 

vi ∈ V Item interacted with at position ici Category label of item vi

ti Timestamp of the i-th interaction 

∆ti = ti+1 − ti Inter-event time interval 

e(t) ∈ Rd Latent intent energy vector 

δi ∈ Rd 

> +

Dimension-wise decay rate vector at position iri Energy retention ratio 

τ ∈ (0 , 1) Boundary threshold 

Λi TPP compensator; integral of λ(t) over (ti, t i+1 )

w(ci, c i+1 ) ∈ (0 , 1] Soft co-occurrence weight between adjacent cate-gories 

α Scaling factor in the soft co-occurrence weight 

bi ∈ { 0, 1} Binary boundary flag ( bi = 1 marks the start of a new segment) 

K Total number of segments produced by the frozen Soft-TPP 

Umax Maximum number of interest slots (upper cap on 

Ueff )

ρ ∈ (0 , 1] Compression ratio; controls the degree of slot com-pression relative to segment count 

η Temperature hyperparameter in the contrastive loss LCL 

γ Weight of the contrastive regularizer in the joint training loss 

β Weight of the interest diversity regularizer in the joint training loss 14 O(K2 · d), cross-attention over Umax interest slots contributing O(Umax · K · d), and the diversity regularizer adding O(U 2max · d); since both Umax and L2 are small constants, the HIE reduces to O(K2 ·d). In addition to the encoder cost, the full-catalog prediction layer used for cross-entropy training and full-ranking evaluation requires O(|V| · d) scoring per instance, or O(B|V| · d) for a mini-batch of size B. The joint per-instance complexity is therefore O(N 2 · d + K2 · d + |V| · d) when full softmax scoring is included. 

4. Experiments 

4.1. Datasets                             

> Table 2: Statistics of the datasets.
> Dataset # Users # Items # Cats # Interacts Avg. Len Density Duration (h)
> ML-1M 6,040 3,416 18 999,611 165.50 4.84% 395.55 Amazon 65,262 106,427 28 1,540,690 23.61 0.02% 4,128.80 Steam 39,795 10,587 44 1,790,393 44.99 0.42% 30,761.08

We evaluate our method on three publicly available benchmarks that span diverse application domains and exhibit varying levels of interaction sparsity, ensuring a compre-hensive and rigorous assessment. 

• ML-1M (Harper and Konstan, 2015) is a widely adopted movie rating dataset from the MovieLens platform, comprising one million explicit ratings assigned by approximately 6,000 users to around 4,000 films. Following common sequential recommendation practice, ratings are treated as implicit interactions and ordered by timestamp. Its relatively dense interaction structure makes it a standard testbed for sequential recommendation research. 

• Amazon (He and McAuley, 2016) is a large-scale product review collection span-ning multiple merchandise categories on the Amazon e-commerce platform. To balance data scale with computational tractability, we retain the most recent 2 mil-lion interactions aggregated across all categories before preprocessing, preserving both temporal ordering and cross-category diversity. 

• Steam (Kang and McAuley, 2018) is a video game interaction dataset collected from the Steam gaming platform, capturing user purchase and play histories. Its domain-specific nature and moderate sparsity provide a complementary evaluation setting to the other two benchmarks. All datasets are preprocessed following the filtering procedure that retains users with at least 20 interactions and items with at least 5 interactions. Category metadata is mapped before model training and then kept fixed across all splits. Data partitioning adheres to the widely adopted leave-one-out protocol (Kang and McAuley, 2018; Li et al., 2021): the most recent interaction of each user is reserved for testing, the second-most-recent for validation, and all remaining interactions constitute the training set. This chronological split strictly respects the temporal ordering of interactions to prevent data leakage. For each user, the validation instance uses only the training prefix to predict the validation item, while the test instance uses the training plus validation prefix to pre-dict the test item. Soft-TPP pretraining is performed only on training prefixes. When 15 generating boundary flags for validation and testing, the frozen detector is applied only to adjacent events inside the visible prefix, so the held-out target’s item identity, times-tamp, and category are not used to compute ∆ti, w(ci, c i+1 ), or boundary flags. Thus, the boundary sequence available to S2-CAR at evaluation time is causally determined by observed interactions only. Summary statistics for all three datasets are reported in Ta-ble 2. Notably, the three datasets exhibit substantially different temporal scales: ML-1M has a compact average sequence duration of 395.55 hours, Amazon spans 4,128.80 hours on average, and Steam extends to 30,761.08 hours, reflecting the long-term nature of gaming engagement. 

4.2. Baselines 

We compare our proposed method against a representative and diverse set of sequen-tial recommendation models, ranging from classical approaches to state-of-the-art con-trastive learning frameworks. We compare against 13 baselines spanning three categories: general sequential recommenders (GRU4Rec, Caser, SASRec, BERT4Rec, DSSRec), aug-mentation and multi-intent methods (MiaSRec, CL4SRec, DuoRec, ICSRec, BASRec), and temporal-aware recommenders (TiSASRec, DT-GAT, TLSRec). We also summarize the features of different baselines and our proposed model in Table 3. 

• GRU4Rec (Hidasi et al., 2015) is among the earliest deep sequential recom-menders, employing gated recurrent units to encode the temporal dynamics of user sessions. It introduces session-parallel mini-batching and ranking-based loss func-tions tailored to the recommendation setting. 

• Caser (Tang and Wang, 2018) frames sequential recommendation as an image recognition problem by treating the embedding matrix of recent items as an “image” and applying both horizontal and vertical convolutional filters to capture point-level and union-level transition patterns at multiple granularities. 

• DSSRec (Ma et al., 2020) proposes a sequence-to-sequence training strategy based on latent self-supervision and disentanglement. Rather than predicting only the next item, it reconstructs representations of future subsequences in the latent space, and constructs training pairs from subsequences that share the same underlying user intent, enabling the model to capture longer-term and more diverse user preferences. 

• SASRec (Kang and McAuley, 2018) introduces an unidirectional self-attention ar-chitecture that adaptively attends to relevant items in a user’s history to predict the next interaction. Its scalability and strong empirical performance have established it as a canonical sequential recommendation baseline. 

• BERT4Rec (Sun et al., 2019) adapts the bidirectional encoder representations from the BERT language model to sequential recommendation via a cloze-style masked item prediction task, enabling the model to leverage both left- and right-context signals when learning item representations. 

• CL4SRec (Xie et al., 2022) is a contrastive framework for sequential recommen-dation that introduces three sequence-level data augmentation operators, random cropping, item masking, and subsequence reordering, and enforces representation consistency between augmented views through an InfoNCE-style contrastive objec-tive. 16 • DuoRec (Qiu et al., 2022) addresses the representation degeneration problem in transformer-based sequential models by combining a model-level unsupervised aug-mentation based on dropout-induced stochastic encoders with a supervised con-trastive objective that pulls together sequences sharing the same target item. 

• MiaSRec (Choi et al., 2024) augments the standard transformer architecture with a multi-intent module that routes each item to several intent embeddings, allowing the model to disentangle and concurrently track multiple evolving user intents within a single sequence encoder. 

• ICSRec (Qin et al., 2024) decomposes user interaction histories into intent-homogeneous subsequences by clustering items into latent intent categories, and then applies con-trastive learning at the intent level to explicitly align representations of sequences sharing the same underlying user purpose. 

• BASRec (Dang et al., 2025) augments sequential recommendation with balanced relevance and diversity, constructing augmented training signals that preserve target relevance while improving behavioral diversity. 

• TiSASRec (Li et al., 2020) employs a time-aware self-attention mechanism that incorporates both absolute positional information and relative time intervals be-tween user interactions, enabling the model to capture temporal dynamics within the sequence. 

• TLSRec (Chen et al., 2022) segments interaction histories into sessions and ap-plies a hierarchical self-attention network to capture preferences at both the session and intra-session levels, fusing them through a neural time gate that adaptively weights long- and short-term signals based on the elapsed time since the user’s last interaction. 

• DT-GAT (Guo et al., 2026) proposes a dual-channel temporal graph attention architecture that jointly models item-level and sequence-level dynamics, combined with a multi-temporal window mechanism to produce user representations. 

4.3. Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate all methods using two standard top-K ranking metrics widely adopted in sequential recommendation: Recall (R@ K) and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR@ K), with K ∈ { 5, 10 }. R@ K measures retrieval effectiveness by computing the fraction of test cases in which the ground-truth item appears within the top-K ranked candidates: R@ K = 1

|U| 

> |U|

X

> i=1

I(ri ≤ K), (21) where U denotes the set of test users, ri is the rank assigned to the ground-truth item for the i-th user, and I(·) is the indicator function returning 1 if the condition holds and 0 otherwise. R@ K treats all positions within the top-K list equally and thus reflects cov-erage without regard to ranking position. MRR@ K complements R@ K by incorporating positional sensitivity, rewarding methods that place the ground-truth item closer to the top of the ranked list: MRR@ K = 1

|U| 

> |U|

X

> i=1

I(ri ≤ K)

ri

. (22) 17 Since each test case contains exactly one ground-truth item, the reciprocal rank 1/r i is non-zero only when the ground-truth item falls within the top-K list, making the above expression equivalent to the standard truncated form. Higher MRR@ K values indicate that the ground-truth item not only appears in the top-K list but is consistently ranked near the top, thereby reflecting the quality of the ranking more faithfully than R@ K

alone. 

4.4. Experiment Settings 

All models are implemented in PyTorch and trained on a single NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPU (24 GB VRAM). To ensure fair and reproducible comparisons, we enforce a uni-fied set of core hyperparameters across all baselines and our proposed method: a hidden embedding dimensionality of 100, a mini-batch size of 100, and ℓ2-normalized parameter initialization to stabilize early training dynamics. All models are optimized with the Adam optimizer at a fixed learning rate of 10 −3, and training is terminated via early stopping with a patience of 20 epochs monitored on validation R@10. All baseline num-bers are reproduced under this unified protocol, rather than taken from original papers, to ensure a fair comparison under the same evaluation conditions. To eliminate the confounding effect of different negative-sampling strategies and sam-pled candidate sizes in sequential recommendation evaluation, we use full cross-entropy over the entire item set V, rather than sampled softmax or negative sampling. During evaluation, each test instance is ranked against the complete candidate set of size |V| (i.e., all items in the catalog), and no sampled negatives are used for fair comparison (Krichene and Rendle, 2020). For S2-CAR, additional hyperparameters are set as follows. The Soft-TPP pretraining stage uses the same Adam optimizer, learning rate, batch size, and 5-run seed protocol as the main model unless otherwise specified, and is run for 5 epochs before freezing. The TPP scaling factor α is fixed at 10. The contrastive loss weight γ is searched over 

0.001 , 0.01 , 0.1, 0.5, the diversity weight β over 0.001 , 0.005 , 0.01 , 0.2 and selected as 0.005 according to validation R@10, the compression ratio ρ over 0.25 , 0.5, 0.75 , 1.0, and the energy threshold τ over 0.5, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9. The contrastive temperature is fixed at 0.5. The SIE and HIE each use 2 Transformer layers and 10 attention heads. The maximum interest slot count Umax is set to 50. For MS-RoPE, per-head frequency scales are initialized on a log-uniform grid spanning [1 .0, 10 .0] across the 10 heads, allowing each head to specialize in positional dependencies at a different granularity. To account for stochastic variability in model training, all experiments are repeated independently 5 times with different random seeds. We report the mean performance across runs and provide 95% confidence intervals for the best and second-best methods on each dataset to indicate the variability of observed improvements. To better evaluate the performance of the proposed S2-CAR, we design experiments to answer the following research questions: 

• RQ1 (Overall Performance): Does S2-CAR consistently outperform state-of-the-art sequential recommenders across diverse benchmarks? 

• RQ2 (Plug-in Generalizability): Is the proposed energy-based TPP segmentation a broadly applicable design? Does integrating it into existing sequential models as a plug-in module yield consistent performance gains? 18 • RQ3 (Ablation Analysis): How do the individual components of S2-CAR, the Context-Aware Soft-TPP segmentation, the Segment-Count-Adaptive Multi-Intent Ex-traction, and the Hierarchical Interest Encoder, each contribute to overall recommen-dation performance? 

• RQ4 (Hyperparameter Sensitivity): How sensitive is S2-CAR to key hyperparam-eters, including the energy threshold τ , the compression ratio ρ, and the loss weights 

γ?

• RQ5 (Computational Efficiency): Is the additional computational overhead intro-duced by the two-stage training procedure of S2-CAR acceptable for practical deploy-ment? 

• RQ6 (Middle Information Utilization): Can S2-CAR effectively utilize intent-relevant signals embedded in the middle of interaction sequences? 

4.5. Overall Performance(RQ1) 

Table 3: Feature comparison across sequential recommendation models. A checkmark ( ✓) indicates the model incorporates the corresponding technique, while a cross mark ( ✗) indicates it does not. Feature labels are assigned according to the definitions in this caption; adaptive intent segmentation denotes learned or data-adaptive boundary inference rather than fixed window or heuristic session partitioning.                                                                             

> Models Intent Modeling Modeling Techniques Temporal Dynamics Adaptive Intent Segmentation Multi-Interest Modeling Hierarchical Encoding Category-Aware Modeling GRU4Rec ✗✗✗✗✗
> Caser ✗✗✗✗✗
> BERT4Rec ✗✗✗✗✗
> SASRec ✗✗✗✗✗
> DSSRec ✓✗✗✗✗
> CL4SRec ✗✗✗✗✗
> DuoRec ✗✗✗✗✗
> MiaSRec ✗✗✓✗✗
> ICSRec ✗✗✓✗✗
> BASRec ✗✗✗✗✗
> TiSASRec ✓✗✗✗✗
> TLSRec ✓✗✗✓✗
> DT-GAT ✓✗✓✗✗
> S2-CAR ✓✓✓✓✓

Table 4: Performance comparison on three datasets. We report 95% confidence intervals (5 runs) for second-best and best methods. Best results are bold , and second-best are underlined. 

Method ML-1M Amazon Steam R@5 R@10 MRR@5 MRR@10 R@5 R@10 MRR@5 MRR@10 R@5 R@10 MRR@5 MRR@10 

GRU4Rec 2.44 3.29 1.44 1.56 1.95 2.85 1.15 1.35 7.48 10.23 5.19 5.50 Caser 6.89 11.27 3.59 4.55 2.29 3.17 1.48 1.59 8.89 11.74 6.64 7.01 DSSRec 7.21 14.35 3.11 3.97 2.23 3.68 0.62 0.72 8.20 12.50 6.88 7.39 BERT4Rec 9.96 18.55 4.18 5.33 1.20 2.27 0.51 0.64 9.58 12.74 7.08 7.49 SASRec 10.19 16.63 4.92 5.75 2.76 4.23 1.41 1.61 9.82 13.05 7.13 7.59 CL4SRec 9.95 16.30 5.08 5.92 2.89 4.15 1.62 1.84 9.37 12.71 6.74 7.17 DuoRec 11.58 17.41 5.71 5.94 1.51 2.52 0.77 0.91 7.31 10.66 4.55 5.00 MiaSRec 11.80 19.75 5.50 6.50 2.20 3.41 1.15 1.31 9.71 12.81 7.16 7.57 ICSRec 10.70 17.25 5.33 6.19 2.80 4.32 1.47 1.67 9.70 13.28 7.12 7.60 BASRec 15.75 ±0.14 24.75 ±0.19 8.26 9.44 2.75 4.27 1.44 1.64 9.93 ±0.11 13.41 ±0.13 7.21 ±0.09 7.64 ±0.07 TiSASRec 14.09 22.10 7.12 8.15 2.48 3.91 1.28 1.46 8.96 12.52 6.41 6.87 TLSRec 15.50 24.41 9.18 ±0.09 9.94 ±0.11 3.38 ±0.11 5.18 ±0.06 1.73 ±0.05 1.97 ±0.09 9.75 13.30 6.80 7.28 DT-GAT 9.88 15.38 4.75 5.71 2.71 4.92 1.44 1.67 8.26 11.64 5.96 6.42 

S2-CAR 20.03 ±0.16 28.74 ±0.20 11.92 ±0.12 13.07 ±0.14 4.04 ±0.05 5.74 ±0.07 2.30 ±0.03 2.51 ±0.05 10.84 ±0.10 14.41 ±0.14 7.86 ±0.08 8.32 ±0.09 Improv. +27.17% +16.12% +29.85% +31.49% +19.53% +10.81% +32.95% +27.41% +9.16% +7.46% +9.02% +8.90% 

Table 4 reports R@5, R@10, MRR@5, and MRR@10 for all methods across the ML-1M, Amazon, and Steam datasets. S2-CAR achieves the best mean scores on every metric 19 and dataset. The reported confidence intervals for the best and second-best methods indicate that the observed gains are stable across repeated runs. GRU4Rec and Caser represent an earlier generation of sequential recommenders. GRU4Rec encodes interaction histories through gated recurrent units but treats each time step uniformly, which limits its sensitivity to the varying importance of individual interactions. Caser instead applies convolutional filters over a fixed-length item window to detect local transition patterns; because the receptive field is bounded, it struggles to propagate long-range dependencies. Both models trail every attention-based method by a wide margin, confirming that simple recurrence and local convolution are insufficient for capturing the heterogeneous dynamics present in real-world interaction logs. Among the augmentation and intent-aware methods, CL4SRec, DuoRec, ICSRec, and BASRec each exhibit dataset-specific strengths: BASRec is the strongest method in this group on ML-1M and Steam, yet none transfers uniformly across all three benchmarks. Among the temporal and multi-interest methods, TiSASRec outperforms SASRec, confirming that explicit temporal modeling benefits dense, long-horizon logs, but its gains do not transfer to sparser datasets where irregular time-gaps reduce signal reliability. TLSRec’s second best performance on Amazon suggests that fixed temporal window segmentation helps when behavioral phases are temporally well-separated. However, its fixed gap-based criterion limits generalization to datasets where intent transitions are less aligned with raw time-gaps. Moreover, MiaSRec’s fixed-capacity interest slots struggle to disambiguate the increasingly complex interaction patterns in long histories, while DT-GAT’s graph-based aggregation suffers from over-smoothing as sequence length grows, causing distinct behavioral signals to collapse into indistinguishable representations. S2-CAR maintains a consistent advantage in both retrieval coverage and ranking quality throughout. Notably, the largest relative MRR@5 gain appears on Amazon, while ML-1M has the longest average sequence length (165.50). This suggests that the improvement is not explained by sequence length alone, but also by sparsity, temporal scale, and category heterogeneity. The more modest but still consistent improvements on Steam (avg. length 44.99) further indicate that the approach generalizes beyond the densest long-sequence setting. All results are reported as the mean across 5 independent runs; the reported confidence intervals for the best and second-best methods indicate stable margins across runs. 

4.6. Plug-in Generalizability (RQ2) 

To evaluate whether the proposed Soft-TPP segmentation module is broadly appli-cable beyond the full S2-CAR framework, we integrate it as a plug-in component into three representative sequential recommendation backbones: CoSeRec (Liu et al., 2021b) (augmentation-based), SURGE (Chang et al., 2021) (graph-based), and DiffuRec (Li et al., 2023) (diffusion-based). For each backbone, the proposed energy-based boundary is incorporated as a learnable embedding added to the input item embeddings, while all other architectural components and hyperparameters remain unchanged. Results are reported in Table 5. Across all three backbones and all three datasets, integrating the TPP segmentation module yields consistent improvements, confirming that the Soft-TPP provides a broadly useful structural signal rather than one that is tailored exclusively to the S2-CAR archi-tecture. The gains are pronounced on the Amazon dataset; we attribute this to the sparser and more heterogeneous nature of the Amazon interaction logs: users on e-commerce 20 platforms tend to exhibit sharper and more frequent intent transitions across product categories, making accurate boundary detection particularly valuable. By contrast, gains on ML-1M are more modest (e.g., 2.76% R@10 for both CoSeRec and DiffuRec), con-sistent with the observation that the denser and more temporally compact MovieLens sequences leave less room for segmentation to disambiguate overlapping intents. Among the three backbones, SURGE benefits most from the plug-in module. SURGE originally constructs an item-item interest graph based on pairwise co-occurrence; without explicit intent boundaries, cross-phase co-occurrences may introduce spurious edges that con-flate distinct behavioral phases. The injected TPP boundary embedding helps SURGE distinguish cross-boundary co-occurrences through boundary-aware item representations, thereby reducing the impact of such cross-phase edges without changing the graph con-struction procedure. CoSeRec and DiffuRec exhibit smaller but consistent gains, indicat-ing that augmentation and diffusion-based methods also benefit from the design.                                                                

> Table 5: Plug-and-Play comparison across three datasets. Integrating our TPP segmentation module into existing sequential backbones yields consistent improvements.
> Method ML-1M Amazon Steam R@10 MRR@10 R@10 MRR@10 R@10 MRR@10
> CoSeRec 20.99 7.84 4.23 1.75 12.88 7.65
> + Ours 21.57 8.11 4.69 1.92 13.19 7.84 Improv. +2.76% +3.44% +10.87% +9.71% +2.41% +2.48% SURGE 16.59 6.21 3.81 1.94 11.92 6.19
> + Ours 17.72 6.93 4.24 2.30 12.31 6.57 Improv. +6.81% +11.59% +11.29% +18.56% +3.27% +6.14% DiffuRec 24.31 9.19 4.35 1.78 13.36 7.19
> + Ours 24.98 9.47 5.01 1.95 13.61 7.45 Improv. +2.76% +3.05% +15.17% +9.55% +1.87% +3.62%

4.7. Ablation Analysis (RQ3) 

To examine how each component contributes to S2-CAR, we conduct an ablation study on all three datasets. The variants in Table 6 modify one architectural factor at a time while keeping the remaining training and evaluation settings unchanged. We first examine the two encoder paths. Removing the Hierarchical Interest Encoder (w/o HIE ) consistently reduces performance, indicating that the segment-level path provides useful cross-segment supervision beyond the causal sequential representation. Using the Hierarchical Interest Encoder alone for inference ( w/o SIE ) leads to a larger decline, since segment pooling weakens intra-segment order information and short-range transition signals. These results support the use of the Sequential Inference Encoder for fine-grained next-item prediction and the Hierarchical Interest Encoder as a structurally balanced training signal. We then evaluate the boundary construction mechanism, with particular attention to whether the observed gains mainly come from access to category and temporal side information. Inspired by fixed temporal segmentation (Chen et al., 2022), we replace Soft-TPP boundaries with fixed 48-hour segmentation ( TPP → Fixed ), which leads to consistent performance degradation, suggesting that a global time-gap rule is insufficient for capturing user-specific intent shifts. To further separate the effect of side information from the effect of Soft-TPP boundary modeling, we introduce a metadata-only variant 21 (w/o TPP ). In this variant, the Soft-TPP module is removed, while temporal embed-dings (Guo et al., 2026) and category embeddings are still provided to the model. Specif-ically, we add these two side information embeddings to the item embedding at each position, so that the model retains access to temporal and category signals without using TPP-based boundary generation. Thus, w/o TPP does not use continuous-time energy decay, the TPP likelihood, or the energy-retention boundary criterion. Its performance is significantly below the full model. This pattern suggests that category and temporal in-formation are useful, but they do not fully explain the gains of S2-CAR. The comparison provides a controlled test showing that the Soft-TPP boundary signal contributes beyond both heuristic time segmentation and direct temporal-category metadata injection. Replacing Multi-Scale Rotary Position Embedding with standard absolute position encoding ( w/o MS-RoPE ) also leads to lower performance, showing that multi-scale relative positional information is useful when user histories contain both short-range transitions and longer-range preference recurrence. Removing the diversity regularizer (w/o Ldiv ) causes a smaller but consistent decline, which is consistent with the role of this term in discouraging collapse among active interest vectors. We next compare different ways of using the Hierarchical Interest Encoder output. Directly summing ui and zi before scoring ( LCL → Sum ) performs worse than con-trastive alignment, suggesting that the hierarchical representation is better used as a training-time regularizer than as an additional inference feature. Replacing the con-trastive objective with a gated fusion scheme ( LCL → Gated ) shows a similar pattern. These results indicate that forcing the two representations into the same scoring vector may introduce noise, whereas contrastive alignment preserves the causal inference path while still transferring segment-level structure during training. Finally, we assess the segment summarization and slot allocation designs. Replacing learned segment attention with mean pooling ( SegAttn → Mean ) yields a moderate drop, implying that items within the same segment do not contribute equally to the segment intent. Fixing the number of active interest slots to five ( DSlot → Fixed )also reduces performance, which suggests that adapting the number of active slots to the inferred segment count better reflects variation in behavioral complexity across users.                                                                                      

> Table 6: Ablation study results.
> Variant ML-1M Amazon Steam R@10 MRR@10 R@10 MRR@10 R@10 MRR@10
> w/o HIE 26.38 11.27 4.82 2.03 13.13 7.65 w/o SIE 21.34 9.12 4.13 1.74 11.47 6.41 w/o MS-RoPE 27.13 12.21 5.41 2.29 13.74 7.91 w/o Ldiv 28.32 12.69 5.48 2.37 14.06 8.14 TPP →Fixed 26.91 12.24 5.26 2.18 13.83 7.94 w/o TPP 26.57 11.96 5.08 2.09 13.61 7.79
> LCL →Sum 26.14 11.18 5.07 2.14 13.21 7.51
> LCL →Gated 26.67 11.73 5.26 2.24 13.54 7.78 SegAttn →Mean 27.83 12.71 5.63 2.43 14.17 8.22 DSlot →Fixed 27.19 12.29 5.51 2.36 13.89 8.07
> S2-CAR 28.74 13.07 5.74 2.51 14.41 8.32

22 4.8. Hyperparameter Sensitivity (RQ4) 

We examine the sensitivity of our model to three key hyperparameters: the contrastive loss weight γ, the compression ratio ρ, and energy threshold τ . For each hyperparameter, we vary its value while holding all others fixed at their optimal settings, and report Recall@10 and MRR@10 on ML-1M, Amazon, and Steam. The results are presented in Figure 3, Figure 4, and Figure 5. The parameter γ governs the contribution of the contrastive objective to the overall training loss. As shown in the first row of Figure 3, performance first improves and then declines as γ increases from 0.001 to 0.5 across all three datasets, with the optimal value at γ = 0 .01 on ML-1M and γ = 0 .1 on Amazon and Steam. When γ is too small, the cross-path alignment signal between the Sequential Inference Encoder and the Hierarchical Interest Encoder is insufficient to regularize the geometry of u, resulting in under-differentiated user representations. Conversely, an excessively large γ causes the contrastive term to dominate the recommendation objective, impairing the sequential modeling capacity of the SIE and degrading ranking quality. These results confirm that 

LCL functions as an effective auxiliary regularizer rather than the primary training signal, and that its weight requires moderate tuning to balance cross-path alignment against next-item prediction fidelity. The compression ratio ρ governs the number of active interest slots relative to the segment count K produced by the frozen Soft-TPP module, via Ueff = min( ⌈ρK ⌉, U max ).As shown in Figure 4, the optimal ρ varies across datasets in a manner consistent with differences in sequence length and the degree of interest recurrence within each domain. On ML-1M, users accumulate substantially longer interaction histories (average length 165.50, compared to 23.61 on Amazon and 44.99 on Steam), which provides more posi-tional opportunities for boundary events to accumulate, causing the Soft-TPP to produce a larger number of boundary-delimited segments K per user. However, a large K does not imply a proportionally larger number of distinct interests: given the narrow category vocabulary (18 categories), the probability of genuine cross-segment intent divergence is limited, meaning many segments are likely manifestations of the same underlying intent type rather than truly distinct behavioral phases. While on the Amazon, sequences are considerably shorter, so the TPP tends to produce fewer segments per user. With a smaller baseline K, interest recurrence is less prevalent, and the segment-to-interest ratio is closer to one-to-one. Compressing the slot budget in this regime ( ρ < 1.0) would prema-turely merge segments that correspond to genuinely distinct behavioral phases, discarding useful diversity in the multi-interest representation. Retaining all slots ( ρ = 1 .0) therefore preserves the full discriminative structure of z without introducing the redundancy that would arise from overly long histories. Finally, the energy threshold τ controls the sensitivity of the Soft-TPP boundary detector: a smaller τ requires more severe energy dissipation before declaring a new seg-ment, yielding coarser segmentation, while a larger τ triggers boundaries more readily, producing finer-grained segments. As shown in Figure 5, the optimal τ varies across datasets in a manner consistent with their temporal characteristics. On ML-1M, where users frequently rate multiple movies within the same day, a large proportion of con-secutive interactions carry near-zero time-gaps, causing the energy retention ratio ri to cluster near its upper bound. A higher threshold ( τ = 0 .8) is therefore required to trigger meaningful boundaries at positions where genuine intent transitions occur, while smaller values fail to distinguish true phase changes from same-session continuations. On Ama-zon, the sparser and more category-diverse interaction logs produce larger inter-event 23 time-gaps and more frequent categorical divergence, driving ri to lower values on aver-age; the optimal threshold ( τ = 0 .7) is thus reached earlier, and increasing τ beyond this point introduces spurious boundaries that fragment coherent browsing sessions. Steam exhibits a pattern similar to ML-1M, with the optimal threshold at τ = 0 .8, consis-tent with its domain-concentrated nature where users engage with games over extended periods within stable interest phases despite the long overall sequence duration. 0.001 0.01 0.1 0.5           

> 9.0
> 10.5
> 12.0
> 13.5 ML-1M
> 23.0
> 25.0
> 27.0
> 29.0 0.001 0.01 0.1 0.5
> 2.20
> 2.35
> 2.50
> 2.65 Amazon
> 5.10
> 5.30
> 5.50
> 5.70 0.001 0.01 0.1 0.5
> 7.5
> 7.8
> 8.1
> 8.4 Steam
> 13.0
> 13.5
> 14.0
> 14.5 MRR@10 Recall@10

Figure 3: Hyper-parameter sensitivity analysis of γ on three datasets 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0           

> 11.5
> 11.9
> 12.3
> 12.7 ML-1M
> 26.0
> 26.8
> 27.6
> 28.4 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0
> 2.30
> 2.38
> 2.46
> 2.54 Amazon
> 5.30
> 5.46
> 5.62
> 5.78 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0
> 7.9
> 8.1
> 8.3
> 8.5 Steam
> 13.7
> 13.9
> 14.2
> 14.5 MRR@10 Recall@10

Figure 4: Hyper-parameter sensitivity analysis of ρ on three datasets 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9           

> 12.50
> 12.80
> 13.10
> 13.40 ML-1M
> 26.00
> 27.00
> 28.00
> 29.00 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9
> 2.20
> 2.40
> 2.60
> 2.80 Amazon
> 5.00
> 5.40
> 5.80
> 6.20 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9
> 7.70
> 8.00
> 8.30
> 8.60 Steam
> 13.00
> 13.60
> 14.20
> 14.80 MRR@10 Recall@10

Figure 5: Hyper-parameter sensitivity analysis of τ on three datasets 

4.9. Computational Efficiency (RQ5) 

We compare the computational cost of S2-CAR against four representative baselines on the Amazon dataset, measuring per-epoch actual training time, peak GPU memory, and epochs to convergence. Results on the other two datasets follow the same relative ordering and are omitted for brevity. Table 7 reports the per-epoch training time, peak GPU memory, and epochs to con-vergence for the proposed method and baselines on the Amazon dataset. S2-CAR’s per-epoch time (144 s) is higher than BASRec (71 s) and SASRec (58 s) due to the additional hierarchical encoder, but it converges in only 7 epochs, bringing the total training time to 1,008 seconds, competitive with BASRec (71 s × 26 epochs = 1,846 s total) and ICSRec 24 Table 7: Computational efficiency comparison on Amazon. Training time per epoch and peak GPU memory are measured on a single NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPU. † denotes the TPP training cost, which is a one-time overhead and excluded from the per-epoch timing.                      

> Method Time/Epoch (s) GPU Mem (MB) Epochs to Converge
> SASRec 58 6,663 13 CL4SRec 231 13,955 10 ICSRec 176 15,970 9BASRec 71 11,083 26
> S2-CAR 144 11,375 7
> TPP pre-train †91,162 5

(176 s × 9 epochs = 1,584 s total). In terms of memory, S2-CAR (11,375 MB) is compa-rable to BASRec (11,083 MB) and considerably more efficient than ICSRec (15,970 MB). The Soft-TPP pre-training adds only 45 seconds in total (9 s × 5 epochs), which is negligible relative to the main-model training cost. The complexity-adaptive slot gating (Ueff = min( ⌈ρK ⌉, U max )) selects a compact active subset from the Umax candidate inter-est vectors. In the current implementation, candidate interest vectors are still computed from Umax queries, so the main cross-attention cost remains O(Umax · K · d). The adaptive selection reduces the subsequent pooling and diversity-regularization computation over active interest vectors, and the entire HIE branch is discarded at serving time. 

4.10. Middle Information Utilization (RQ6) 

We investigate whether S2-CAR improves the utilization of middle-sequence infor-mation by evaluating its reliance on different parts of the interaction history and its robustness to boundary-level perturbations. To this end, we conduct two complementary experiments: (1) an item deletion analysis that measures the contribution of different temporal segments, and (2) a boundary noise injection experiment that probes whether segmentation can isolate cross-segment interference. Prior analysis (Figure 1b) reveals a clear asymmetry in SASRec: removing items from the middle segment causes little or no performance degradation, and may even lead to slight improvements for longer sequences, whereas removing items from the last 

segment consistently degrades performance. This indicates that existing models largely under-utilize middle-segment history and over-rely on recent interactions. Figure 6 extends the same item deletion protocol to S2-CAR across all three bench-mark datasets. In contrast to SASRec, removing items from the middle segment consis-tently leads to performance degradation across all length groups (orange bars, ∆Recall@10 <

0 throughout, where ∆Recall@10 denotes the deleted-sequence score minus the original score). This result shows that S2-CAR actively relies on middle-sequence information rather than treating it as redundant. Meanwhile, removing items from the last segment (black bars) also degrades performance, confirming that recent interactions remain impor-tant. Together, these results indicate that S2-CAR achieves a more balanced utilization of both short-term and long-term signals. To further understand the underlying mechanism, we examine whether this improve-ment is driven by accurate intent segmentation. If segmentation correctly identifies intent boundaries, noise introduced at segment boundaries should be contained locally rather than affecting representations that capture longer-range dependencies. To test this, for each user sequence we insert a randomly sampled out-of-category item at a random po-sition within either the last temporal segment ( Tail Injection ) or the first temporal 25 17 46            

> 47 76
> 77 106
> 107 136
> 137 166
> 167 196
> 197 226
> Length group (short long)
> Recall@10
> 0(a) ML-1M 20 29
> 30 39
> 40 49
> 50 59
> 60 69
> 70 79
> Length group (short long)
> Recall@10
> 0(b) Amazon (length ≥20 )12 26
> 27 41
> 42 56
> 57 71
> 72 86
> 87 101
> 102 116
> 192 206
> Length group (short long)
> Recall@10
> 0(c) Steam Removal in Last segment Removal in Middle segment

Figure 6: Item deletion analysis for S2-CAR across all three datasets ( ∆ Recall@10). Half the items in the last segment (short-term proxy, black) or middle segment (long-term proxy, orange) are randomly removed; bars below zero indicate performance degradation relative to the original sequence. 

segment ( Head Injection ), where segments are defined by the standard 48-hour inac-tivity threshold (Chen et al., 2022). We deliberately adopt this fixed heuristic rather than TPP-derived boundaries to ensure that the injected noise is independent of S2-CAR’s own segmentation, avoiding confounding effects in cross-model comparison. All models are retrained from scratch on the perturbed sequences under identical settings, and the performance change is reported as (perturbed − original )/original × 100% ; be-cause the reported values are negative under performance degradation, values closer to zero indicate greater robustness. As shown in Table 8, S2-CAR reports values closest to zero in most settings and remains competitive in the few cases where TLSRec is slightly closer to zero, such as Amazon R@5. Overall, the results suggest that boundary-level noise is less likely to dominate S2-CAR’s sequence representation. In contrast, SASRec suffers the largest degradation, reflecting its strong reliance on positional bias. CL4SRec shows moderate robustness due to stochastic augmentations that reduce dependence on specific positions, while ICSRec benefits from intent-level clustering but still allows noise to affect the target intent representation in the absence of explicit boundary detection. TLSRec exhibits moderate robustness, consistently outperforming SASRec and CL4SRec, as its session-level modeling partially captures temporal structure. However, without explicit boundary detection, it remains susceptible to cross-segment noise in most metrics, leading to greater degradation than S2-CAR overall. 

5. Discussion 

5.1. Theoretical Implications 

S2-CAR advances the theoretical understanding of user intent modeling in sequen-tial recommendation along three dimensions. First, by grounding intent segmentation in a Continuous-Time Temporal Point Process (TPP) framework, we provide a principled probabilistic alternative to heuristic time-gap or fixed-window partitioning strategies. The energy retention ratio ri derived from the Context-Aware Soft-TPP offers a theoret-ically motivated boundary criterion that adapts to the local categorical dynamics of each user, rather than imposing a globally uniform criterion. Second, the Segment-Count-Adaptive slot gating mechanism (Equation 14) formalizes the intuition that interest ca-26 Table 8: Relative performance degradation (%) under boundary noise injection.                                                                        

> Dataset Metric SASRec (%) ↓CL4SRec (%) ↓ICSRec (%) ↓TLSRec (%) ↓S2-CAR (%) ↓
> ML-1M
> R@5 −9.83 −6.41 −4.72 −3.89 −1.40
> R@10 −9.12 −5.87 −4.31 −4.17 −0.19
> MRR@5 −10.24 −6.93 −5.01 −4.52 −1.06
> MRR@10 −10.57 −7.12 −4.88 −4.81 −1.21 Amazon
> R@5 −7.41 −5.23 −4.18 −3.14 −3.37 R@10 −6.63 −4.97 −3.85 −3.95 −3.42
> MRR@5 −8.62 −5.64 −4.53 −4.17 −3.23
> MRR@10 −8.21 −5.38 −4.29 −4.75 −3.22 Steam
> R@5 −8.74 −5.91 −4.43 −4.62 −1.70
> R@10 −7.93 −5.42 −3.97 −4.14 −0.37
> MRR@5 −9.31 −6.24 −4.61 −3.73 −1.62
> MRR@10 −8.87 −5.83 −4.37 −4.07 −1.29

pacity should scale with behavioral complexity, addressing the uniform-slot limitation identified in prior multi-interest work (Li et al., 2019; Cen et al., 2020). Third, the decoupled training design, where the HIE provides contrastive supervision to the SIE without participating in inference, establishes a general principle for injecting structural regularization into autoregressive encoders without compromising their sequential fidelity. 

5.2. Practical Implications 

From a practical standpoint, S2-CAR offers several deployment-relevant advantages. The Soft-TPP segmentation module is pretrained once and frozen, adding only 45 seconds of one-time overhead (Table 7), and functions as a plug-and-play component that con-sistently improves existing backbones, including augmentation-based (CoSeRec), graph-based (SURGE), and diffusion-based (DiffuRec) architectures, without modifying their internal design (Table 5). This modularity makes the proposed segmentation broadly applicable beyond the S2-CAR framework. Furthermore, S2-CAR converges in only 7 epochs despite its two-encoder architecture, resulting in a total training cost competitive with simpler baselines such as BASRec, while achieving substantially higher recommenda-tion quality. These properties suggest that S2-CAR is suitable for real-world deployment scenarios where both accuracy and computational efficiency are critical. 

5.3. Differences from Existing Work 

Table 3 summarizes how S2-CAR differs from existing methods along five modeling dimensions. Unlike prior hierarchical methods that rely on fixed temporal windows (Chen et al., 2022) or raw time-gap thresholds (Ludewig and Jannach, 2018), S2-CAR infers segment boundaries from the continuous-time decay of latent intent energy, enabling task-specific segmentation without manually annotated boundary labels. Unlike multi-interest models that allocate a uniform number of interest slots across all users (Li et al., 2019; Choi et al., 2024), S2-CAR dynamically adjusts slot capacity in proportion to each user’s segment count via the compression ratio ρ, preventing both capacity waste and under-representation of diverse interests. 

5.4. Limitations and Future Work 

While S2-CAR achieves consistent improvements across three diverse benchmarks, several limitations merit discussion. First, the two-stage training requires that category information is available at both pretraining and inference time; datasets without category metadata would require an alternative decay conditioning mechanism, such as item-level 27 semantic similarity or co-occurrence statistics. Second, the threshold hyperparameter τ

requires dataset-specific tuning, as optimal values vary with the temporal density and cat-egorical diversity of each domain (Section 4.8); the hyperparameter sensitivity analysis in Section 4.8 shows that performance is relatively stable within a moderate range around the optimal value, but automating this selection remains an open direction. Third, while the Soft-TPP module is computationally lightweight ( O(N d ) per sequence, pretrained once in 45 seconds), the auxiliary HIE branch increases the parameter count by approximately 

1.7× the parameter count of a single Transformer, increasing GPU memory requirements during training to around 11 GB (comparable to BASRec at 11 GB, but higher than SAS-Rec at 6.6 GB, as reported in Table 7); future work could explore more memory-efficient contrastive designs such as momentum encoders or asynchronous teacher updates. Fi-nally, the current evaluation is limited to three benchmarks spanning movie, e-commerce, and gaming domains. Extending the evaluation to cross-domain, social media, or news recommendation settings, where intent dynamics may be triggered by different contextual signals, would further validate the generality of the proposed energy-based segmentation framework. 

6. Conclusion 

In this paper, we proposed S2-CAR, a Segmentation-Supervised Hierarchical Multi-Intent Network with Complexity-Adaptive Regularization for sequential recommendation. Our work is motivated by two complementary failure modes of existing approaches: the reliance on fixed temporal boundaries that misalign with true intent transitions, and the uniform allocation of interest capacity that fails to reflect the varying complexity of user behavior across sessions. To address these, S2-CAR introduces a Context-Aware Soft-TPP that models user intent as a continuously decaying latent energy state, triggering segment boundaries only when energy retention falls below a dataset-specific threshold, without manually annotated boundary labels. Our plug-in experiments show consistent improvements on representative sequential recommenders, suggesting that behaviorally adaptive boundary construction can serve as a useful structural prior for a broader class of sequence modeling frameworks. 28 References 

Cen, Y., Zhang, J., Zou, X., Zhou, C., Yang, H., Tang, J., 2020. Controllable multi-interest framework for recommendation, in: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 2942–2951. Chang, J., Gao, C., Zheng, Y., Hui, Y., Niu, Y., Song, Y., Jin, D., Li, Y., 2021. Sequential recommendation with graph neural networks, in: Proceedings of the 44th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval, pp. 378– 387. Chen, L., Yang, N., Yu, P.S., 2022. Time lag aware sequential recommendation, in: Proceedings of the 31st ACM international conference on information & knowledge management, pp. 212–221. Choi, M., Kim, H.y., Cho, H., Lee, J., 2024. Multi-intent-aware session-based recommen-dation, in: Proceedings of the 47th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval, pp. 2532–2536. Daley, D.J., Vere-Jones, D., 2003. An introduction to the theory of point processes: volume I: elementary theory and methods. Springer. Dang, Y., Zhang, J., Liu, Y., Yang, E., Liang, Y., Guo, G., Zhao, J., Wang, X., 2025. Augmenting sequential recommendation with balanced relevance and diversity, in: Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 11563–11571. Deng, H., Hu, J., 2024. Sse4rec: Sequential recommendation with subsequence extraction. Knowledge-Based Systems 285, 111364. Du, N., Dai, H., Trivedi, R., Upadhyay, U., Gomez-Rodriguez, M., Song, L., 2016. Re-current marked temporal point processes: Embedding event history to vector, in: Pro-ceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1555–1564. Fang, H., Zhang, D., Shu, Y., Guo, G., 2020. Deep learning for sequential recommenda-tion: Algorithms, influential factors, and evaluations. ACM Transactions on Informa-tion Systems (TOIS) 39, 1–42. Guo, L., Wu, S., Lu, D., Gao, L., Xu, G., 2026. Dual-channel time-aware graph attention network for session-based recommendation. Information Sciences , 123289. Harper, F.M., Konstan, J.A., 2015. The movielens datasets: History and context. Acm transactions on interactive intelligent systems (tiis) 5, 1–19. Hawkes, A.G., 1971. Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually exciting point processes. Biometrika 58, 83–90. He, R., McAuley, J., 2016. Ups and downs: Modeling the visual evolution of fashion trends with one-class collaborative filtering, in: proceedings of the 25th international conference on world wide web, pp. 507–517. Hidasi, B., Karatzoglou, A., Baltrunas, L., Tikk, D., 2015. Session-based recommenda-tions with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06939 . 29 Hu, F., Zidek, J.V., 2002. The weighted likelihood. Canadian Journal of Statistics 30, 347–371. Isham, V., Westcott, M., 1979. A self-correcting point process. Stochastic processes and their applications 8, 335–347. Kang, W.C., McAuley, J., 2018. Self-attentive sequential recommendation, in: 2018 IEEE international conference on data mining (ICDM), IEEE. pp. 197–206. Krichene, W., Rendle, S., 2020. On sampled metrics for item recommendation, in: Pro-ceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 1748–1757. Li, A., Liu, X., Yang, B., 2024. Item attribute-aware graph collaborative filtering. Expert Systems with Applications 238, 122242. Li, C., Liu, Z., Wu, M., Xu, Y., Zhao, H., Huang, P., Kang, G., Chen, Q., Li, W., Lee, D.L., 2019. Multi-interest network with dynamic routing for recommendation at tmall, in: Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on information and knowledge management, pp. 2615–2623. Li, J., Wang, Y., McAuley, J., 2020. Time interval aware self-attention for sequential recommendation, in: Proceedings of the 13th international conference on web search and data mining, pp. 322–330. Li, Y., Chen, H., Sun, X., Sun, Z., Li, L., Cui, L., Yu, P.S., Xu, G., 2021. Hyper-bolic hypergraphs for sequential recommendation, in: Proceedings of the 30th ACM international conference on information & knowledge management, pp. 988–997. Li, Z., Chen, Q., Zou, L., Sun, A., Li, C., 2025. Multi-interest recommendation: A survey. ACM Transactions on Information Systems . Li, Z., Sun, A., Li, C., 2023. Diffurec: A diffusion model for sequential recommendation. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 42, 1–28. Liu, C., Li, X., Cai, G., Dong, Z., Zhu, H., Shang, L., 2021a. Noninvasive self-attention for side information fusion in sequential recommendation, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp. 4249–4256. Liu, N.F., Lin, K., Hewitt, J., Paranjape, A., Bevilacqua, M., Petroni, F., Liang, P., 2024. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the association for computational linguistics 12, 157–173. Liu, Z., Chen, Y., Li, J., Yu, P.S., McAuley, J., Xiong, C., 2021b. Contrastive self-supervised sequential recommendation with robust augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.06479 . Long, H., Lu, J., Dai, C., 2025. Dual denoising contrastive learning with multi-interest fusion for sequential recommendation. Scientific Reports . Ludewig, M., Jannach, D., 2018. Evaluation of session-based recommendation algorithms: M. ludewig, d. jannach. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 28, 331–390. 30 Lv, M., Liu, X., Xu, Y., 2025. Dynamic multi-interest graph neural network for session-based recommendation, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelli-gence, pp. 12328–12336. Ma, J., Zhou, C., Yang, H., Cui, P., Wang, X., Zhu, W., 2020. Disentangled self-supervision in sequential recommenders, in: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 483–491. Mei, H., Eisner, J.M., 2017. The neural hawkes process: A neurally self-modulating multivariate point process. Advances in neural information processing systems 30. Ogata, Y., 1978. The asymptotic behaviour of maximum likelihood estimators for sta-tionary point processes. Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics 30, 243–261. Peng, T., Yuan, H., Zhang, Y., Li, Y., Dai, P., Wang, Q., Wang, S., Wu, W., 2025. Tagrec: Temporal-aware graph contrastive learning with theoretical augmentation for sequential recommendation. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 37, 3015–3029. Qin, X., Yuan, H., Zhao, P., Liu, G., Zhuang, F., Sheng, V.S., 2024. Intent contrastive learning with cross subsequences for sequential recommendation, in: Proceedings of the 17th ACM international conference on web search and data mining, pp. 548–556. Qiu, R., Huang, Z., Yin, H., Wang, Z., 2022. Contrastive learning for representation degeneration problem in sequential recommendation, in: Proceedings of the fifteenth ACM international conference on web search and data mining, pp. 813–823. Quadrana, M., Karatzoglou, A., Hidasi, B., Cremonesi, P., 2017. Personalizing session-based recommendations with hierarchical recurrent neural networks, in: proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, pp. 130–137. Sharma, K., Lee, Y.C., Nambi, S., Salian, A., Shah, S., Kim, S.W., Kumar, S., 2024. A survey of graph neural networks for social recommender systems. ACM Computing Surveys 56, 1–34. Su, J., Ahmed, M., Lu, Y., Pan, S., Bo, W., Liu, Y., 2024. Roformer: Enhanced trans-former with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing 568, 127063. Sun, F., Liu, J., Wu, J., Pei, C., Lin, X., Ou, W., Jiang, P., 2019. Bert4rec: Sequen-tial recommendation with bidirectional encoder representations from transformer, in: Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on information and knowledge management, pp. 1441–1450. Tan, Q., Zhang, J., Yao, J., Liu, N., Zhou, J., Yang, H., Hu, X., 2021. Sparse-interest network for sequential recommendation, in: Proceedings of the 14th ACM international conference on web search and data mining, pp. 598–606. Tang, J., Wang, K., 2018. Personalized top-n sequential recommendation via convolu-tional sequence embedding, in: Proceedings of the eleventh ACM international confer-ence on web search and data mining, pp. 565–573. 31 Vassøy, B., Ruocco, M., de Souza da Silva, E., Aune, E., 2019. Time is of the essence: a joint hierarchical rnn and point process model for time and item predictions, in: Proceedings of the twelfth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining, pp. 591–599. Wang, S., Cao, L., Wang, Y., Sheng, Q.Z., Orgun, M.A., Lian, D., 2021. A survey on session-based recommender systems. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54, 1–38. Wang, W., Ma, J., Zhang, Y., Zhang, K., Jiang, J., Yang, Y., Zhou, Y., Zhang, Z., 2025. Intent oriented contrastive learning for sequential recommendation, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 12748–12756. Wang, Y., Du, N., Trivedi, R., Song, L., 2016. Coevolutionary latent feature processes for continuous-time user-item interactions. Advances in neural information processing systems 29. Xie, X., Sun, F., Liu, Z., Wu, S., Gao, J., Zhang, J., Ding, B., Cui, B., 2022. Contrastive learning for sequential recommendation, in: 2022 IEEE 38th international conference on data engineering (ICDE), IEEE. pp. 1259–1273. Zhang, S., Chen, L., Shen, D., Wang, C., Xiong, H., 2025. Hierarchical time-aware mixture of experts for multi-modal sequential recommendation, in: Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025, pp. 3672–3682. Zhang, Z., Chen, R., Liu, S., Yao, Z., Ruwase, O., Chen, B., Wu, X., Wang, Z., 2024. Found in the middle: How language models use long contexts better via plug-and-play positional encoding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37, 60755– 60775. Zhao, Q., Erdogdu, M.A., He, H.Y., Rajaraman, A., Leskovec, J., 2015. Seismic: Aself-exciting point process model for predicting tweet popularity, in: Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1513–1522. 32