Title: InvestPhilBench: A Multi-Layer Dynamic Benchmark for Evaluating Large Language Model Procedural Reasoning in Expert Investment Philosophy

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.25984v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 01:11:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 64

Markdown Content:
# InvestPhilBench: A Multi-Layer Dynamic Benchmark for Evaluating Large Language Model Procedural Reasoning in Expert Investment Philosophy 

# Mingguang Chen 1∗ Bo Qu 2,* 

Abstract 

Large language models are increasingly deployed as investment research assistants, yet no benchmark tests whether they can accurately reconstruct and apply the specific procedural decision frameworks of expert investors. We introduce InvestPhilBench , a multi-layer dynamic benchmark spanning eight cognitive tiers, from principle identification (L1) to novel framework extrapolation (L8). The v0.6 release comprises 118 primary-source-verified investment principle cards, 25 decision framework cards with explicit topology metadata, and 243 QA questions (197 dev / 46 held-out test), including 8 expert-difficulty questions targeting gate-level reconstruction failures (authored after the sanity wave below; first evaluated in v1.0). For reproducible scoring at scale we introduce the Benchmark Automated Scoring Pipeline (BASP) — five algorithmic metrics (OGRS, KCCS, SAP@k, IVP, CKCA) — the 

Failure Mode Detection Protocol (FMDP) with computable rules for six failure modes, and Gate Reconstruction Accuracy (GRA) , a per-gate metric for questions with gold reasoning programs. In this release, InvestPhilBench is primarily a benchmark-and-methodology contribution — the dataset, the BASP/FMDP/GRA scoring pipeline, and a deliberately preliminary empirical study that stress-tests and motivates the metric design rather than serving as a model leaderboard. That study — a four-model sanity wave on the 188-question development split (closed-book) — shows a sharp provider-tier split (BASP 0.906 ↔ 0.438); these mixed-judge numbers are confounded upper bounds (different judges per respondent; §8.7). The central methodological finding survives the caveat: the BASP composite saturates 

at the frontier (Claude L4 = 0.932) while GRA still exposes a procedural deficit (frontier L4 GRA ≈

0.77, L7 GRA 0.57–0.62) — composite scoring rewards fluent prose and hides the procedural gap. v0.6 implements a unified judge and true model-in-the-loop retrieval/oracle conditions, validated on a pipeline pilot (§8.3); the de-confounded multi-model leaderboard and full three-condition run are v1.0 deliverables. We also report a first measured human-alignment estimate: on a 100-item expert-annotated gold set the automated BASP composite tracks the human reference at Pearson r = 0.72 (MAE = 0.10 on the 0–1 scale), with attribution (SAP@3) the weakest sub-metric and the failure-mode detector running sensitive-but-over-flagging (§11.3). 

Keywords: investment philosophy, large language models, financial NLP, benchmark, procedural knowledge, expert reasoning, sovereign wealth funds, sequence alignment, automated evaluation, quantitative scoring. 

# Introduction 

The deployment of large language models as investment research assistants has grown rapidly. Institutional asset managers, sell-side analysts, and retail investors increasingly rely on LLM outputs for due diligence, scenario analysis, and investment thesis generation. When a portfolio manager asks an LLM to “analyze this acquisition target using a Buffett-style framework,” or “compare how Dalio and Soros would position for stagflation,” or “evaluate whether this deal satisfies Norway’s Government Pension Fund exclusion criteria,” the utility and safety of that response depends critically on whether the model has accurate, operationalizable 

knowledge of each investor’s specific sequential decision process — not merely their general reputation. 

> ∗*

Corresponding authors. 1University of California, Riverside (UCR). Email: mchen041@ucr.edu . 2Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT). Email: boqu.sh2019@gmail.com .

1

> arXiv:2606.25984v1 [cs.AI] 24 Jun 2026

Graphical abstract — InvestPhilBench evaluates LLM procedural reasoning over the documented decision frameworks of 9 canonical investors, across an eight-layer cognitive taxonomy (L1–L3 factual → L4–L5 procedural → L6–L8 generative). The central finding: BASP-composite scoring saturates at the frontier, hiding the procedural gap, while per-gate Gate Reconstruction Accuracy (GRA) exposes it. 

Figure 1: Per-layer BASP-composite profile, W1 sanity wave (Condition A, closed-book; Table 11). The four current models across the eight cognitive layers reveal a provider-tier split : the frontier models (Claude Sonnet 4.6, GPT-5.5) hold a high band across L1–L8 while the cost-efficient Gemini models sit in a lower band and collapse at L8. There is no L3 →L4 composite cliff for any model ( ∆ +1.6 to +4.0 pp) — the 16 pp cliff of earlier work was a v0.1-pilot artifact (§8.2); the residual procedural deficit at the frontier is visible only under the gate-level GRA metric (§8.7), not in the composite. See §10.1 for the reconciliation. 2The financial NLP benchmark landscape addresses adjacent but distinct tasks: multi-step numerical calculation over financial statements [FinQA, Chen et al., 2021; FinCalcBench, Zhang et al., 2025], open-book fact retrieval from SEC filings [FinanceBench, Islam et al., 2023], agent-based sequential financial decision-making [INVESTORBENCH, Li et al., ACL 2025], and cross-capability graduate-level financial reasoning [XFinBench, Zhang et al., ACL 2025]. None directly evaluates whether models encode and can apply the structured sequential decision processes expressed in the primary writings of canonical investors. The gap matters because investment philosophy knowledge is qualitatively different from financial calculation or document retrieval. It is procedural , attributed , contradictory , and comparative — each property generating a distinct class of LLM failure. 

Procedural : Buffett’s moat framework has six sequential gates with kill criteria at each. Consider Gate 1: a model asked to apply Buffett’s checklist to a pharmaceutical company must first output a Circle of Competence verdict — Buffett has explicitly stated pharmaceuticals are outside his circle — triggering an immediate REJECT that terminates all further analysis. A model that proceeds to evaluate the pharmaceutical company’s P/E ratio has failed Gate 1 regardless of subsequent reasoning quality. This is FM-3 (Kill Criterion Omission): the model encodes individual criteria but loses the kill-criterion gate structure that gives each element its decision-theoretic meaning. 

Attributed : “Margin of safety” means something specifically different in Graham (1949) vs. Buffett (1988). Graham operationalizes it as price below two-thirds of net asset value — a mechanical asset-liquidation screen. Buffett redefines it as price meaningfully below intrinsic value estimated via owner earnings discounted conservatively. A model answering a Graham L3 question with Buffett’s FCF-based intrinsic value calculation commits FM-5 (Operationalization Flattening): both answers mention “margin of safety,” both are individually defensible, but neither correctly represents the cited investor’s documented operationalization. 

Contradictory : Buffett explicitly rejected airlines — “the worst sort of business” — then purchased $7.7B of airline stocks in 2016, then sold at a loss in 2020. A complete response for an L6 question must document this documented evolution; presenting only the anti-airline view — collapsing three temporally distinct positions into one — is FM-2 (Temporal Conflation), scored 0.0 for actively misleading incompleteness. 

Comparative : Marks’s pendulum and Buffett’s “be fearful when others are greedy” share surface similarity. The structural difference is deep: Marks’s framework requires active cycle-temperature monitoring before deploying capital; Buffett’s treats sentiment as a secondary valuation signal. A model attributing generic “contrarian positioning” to both has lost the mechanistic distinction that makes each framework actionable. Institutional frameworks introduce further complexity. Norway’s NBIM operates under a mandatory ESG exclusion framework: a company on the Council on Ethics list triggers immediate divestment regardless of financial performance. Canada’s CPPIB employs a total portfolio approach with a factor-substitutability kill condition: excess return attributable solely to systematic factor exposure redirects capital to passive alternatives. PIF must honor a dual kill criterion: satisfying IRR hurdles and aligning with Saudi Vision 2030 simultaneously. The necessity for a benchmark — and for a fully quantitative scoring pipeline that scales to v1.0’s 300-question target — is driven by three factors. First, LLM utility for investment research depends entirely on framework-level accuracy; a “Buffett analysis” omitting the Circle of Competence gate is not merely incomplete, it is actively misleading. Second, systematic failure (the cross-model 1986 →1990 owner earnings misattribution) reveals fundamental limits in how transformers encode procedural knowledge from prose. Third, the complexity of investment philosophy provides an eight-layer evaluation surface capable of distinguishing superficial retrieval from genuine architectural reasoning. We present InvestPhilBench and make seven contributions: 1. A cognitive taxonomy for investment philosophy evaluation : Eight evaluation layers in three tiers (L1–L3: factual retrieval; L4–L5: procedural reconstruction; L6–L8: generative application). 2. A primary-source-verified dataset with gold reasoning programs : the v0.6 canonical data release contains 118 reviewer-resolved principle cards, 25 framework cards (each with explicit topology metadata), and 243 QA questions (197 dev / 46 test; seed 20260420) including 8 expert-difficulty 3L4 hard questions targeting discovered gate-level failure patterns, with audited split integrity and machine-generated data-quality diagnostics. 3. Three-condition evaluation design (closed-book, embedding-RAG, and ground-truth-source oracle), implemented as true model-in-the-loop settings and validated on a small pipeline pilot (§8.3). The corresponding empirical decomposition (knowledge gap; retrieval vs. full-card injection) is reported as a pilot observation pending the v1.0 multi-model run. 4. Dynamic benchmark design : Scenario perturbation, metric substitution, and temporal context injection for contamination resistance — a design contribution specified with a worked perturbation instance (§6.5); the at-scale clean-vs-perturbed ablation is part of the v1.0 run. 5. The Benchmark Automated Scoring Pipeline (BASP) : Five novel quantitative metrics (OGRS, KCCS, SAP@k, IVP, CKCA) replacing qualitative rubrics with weighted-average algorithmic scoring. (Human alignment is now measured on a 100-item expert gold set — BASP composite Pearson r = 0.72, MAE = 0.10; see §11.3.) 6. The Failure Mode Detection Protocol (FMDP) : Algorithmic detection rules for all six failure modes (Hallucinated Gate, Temporal Conflation, Kill Criterion Omission, Voice Diffusion, Opera-tionalization Flattening, Anachronistic Application), replacing human adjudication with computable token-level evidence (precision 0.667–0.824 on the n=200 calibration set). 7. A failure mode taxonomy with annotated examples : Six systematic error patterns with FMDP detection rules, quantified prevalence, and primary-source ground truth. 

Scope of this release. This paper is a benchmark-and-methodology contribution: a primary-source-verified dataset, a fully automated scoring pipeline (BASP/FMDP/GRA), and a first measured human-alignment study. The empirical model comparison (§8) is a preliminary single-condition sanity wave under a mixed judge (§8.7) whose role is to motivate and stress-test the metric design; the de-confounded unified-judge multi-model leaderboard, the full three-condition run, the at-scale perturbation ablation, and a dual-human reliability study are explicitly deferred to v1.0 (§11). We post this version to establish the benchmark and methodology; headline procedural-reasoning claims should be read against GRA (§8.7), not the saturating composite. 

Version tags throughout denote data releases , not draft numbers, and reduce to three: all headline results and limitations are reported against the v0.6 release; v0.1 denotes the construction-time pilot, retained only for provenance (Tables 4, 6, 7); and v1.0 denotes planned deliverables. Readers can safely treat any unqualified result as v0.6. 

# 2. Related Work 

Related work is organized around the benchmark design problem rather than by chronology. We first position InvestPhilBench against financial NLP benchmarks, then foreground two general vulnerabilities that practitioners encounter in deployment: long-context degradation and the declarative-to-procedural gap. The section then turns to financial domain-specific models, automated evaluation of open-ended responses, dynamic benchmarking for contamination resistance, and adjacent expert-domain benchmarks in medicine and law. This ordering clarifies the paper’s through-line: InvestPhilBench treats investment philosophy as sequential expert procedure, so both the data construction and the metrics must test framework application rather than fluent recall. 

2.1 Financial NLP Benchmarks: Design Patterns and Performance Landscape 

Understanding InvestPhilBench’s position requires situating it against the structural choices and performance profiles of the most closely related benchmarks. 

FinQA [Chen et al., EMNLP 2021] is the canonical benchmark for multi-step numerical reasoning over financial reports. Its 8,281 QA pairs — drawn from SEC annual reports and earnings releases — require 4models to execute gold reasoning programs : annotated sequences of arithmetic operations that, when executed correctly, produce the target answer. This dual-evaluation design — execution accuracy (is the final answer correct?) alongside program accuracy (is the reasoning path correct?) — directly motivates InvestPhilBench’s gold reasoning program (GRP) annotation for L4 and L7 questions, where a model may reach the correct INVEST/DECLINE verdict via incorrect gate reasoning (execution correct, program incorrect). Key performance finding: expert human annotators achieve 91.16% execution accuracy and 87.49% program accuracy; the best neural model (FinQANet with RoBERTa-large) achieves only 61.24% and 58.86% respectively — a ~30pp expert–model gap that parallels the procedural deficit InvestPhilBench surfaces — at the current frontier not as a composite-score cliff but as a composite-vs-GRA divergence (§8.2, §8.7). FinQA also establishes the methodological precedent of releasing gold programs alongside questions, enabling dual-axis evaluation that single-answer scoring cannot provide. 

ConvFinQA [Chen et al., EMNLP 2022] extends the FinQA setting to multi-turn dialogue over financial documents, requiring models to maintain conversational context and resolve implicit references across turns. Its 3,892 conversation chains reveal a 12–18pp accuracy drop relative to single-turn analogues — a result attributable to context-tracking failures rather than arithmetic errors. For InvestPhilBench, ConvFinQA’s multi-turn design anticipates a v1.0 extension: L7 scenario application questions can be cast as dialogues in which the evaluator probes each gate interactively, enabling measurement of whether framework recall degrades under conversational pressure. 

TAT-QA [Zhu et al., ACL 2021] addresses question answering over hybrid tabular and textual content in financial earnings documents. Its 16,552 questions require joint reasoning over structured tables and unstructured prose — a combined mode absent from both FinQA and standard table QA. TAT-QA’s best model (TAGOP) achieves 58.5% F1, with 15–22pp degradation on questions requiring cross-format synthesis. This result foreshadows InvestPhilBench’s finding that knowledge gap rather than reasoning capacity is the primary performance bottleneck for procedural tasks. 

FinanceBench [Islam et al., 2023] benchmarks open-book financial QA across 10,231 questions about publicly-traded companies from SEC filings. Its most operationally significant finding: GPT-4-Turbo paired with a vector-store retrieval system answered incorrectly or refused to answer 81% of questions ; in closed-book mode (no retrieval), GPT-4-Turbo achieved only 11% accuracy. The oracle condition — providing the exact gold evidence page — substantially outperformed all retrieval configurations, establishing that the primary bottleneck is evidence retrieval, not reasoning over retrieved content. This oracle-condition insight directly motivates InvestPhilBench’s three-condition evaluation design (§7.2): Conditions A (closed-book), B (PKB-augmented), and C (oracle) decompose the knowledge gap vs. retrieval gap vs. application gap for investment philosophy tasks in exactly the manner FinanceBench pioneered for document QA. FinanceBench additionally introduced systematic testing across 16 model configurations (varying provider, retrieval method, and context window) — a multi-configuration discipline we adopt in the v1.0 evaluation design. 

PIXIU [Xie et al., NeurIPS 2023] introduces a comprehensive financial NLP evaluation suite comprising instruction-tuning data and seven tasks spanning sentiment, named entity recognition, headline classification, question answering, stock movement prediction, and credit scoring. PIXIU’s key finding — that domain-specific fine-tuning (FinMA) substantially outperforms general-purpose GPT-4 on lower-order financial NLP tasks while underperforming on complex open-ended reasoning — provides an empirical anchor for InvestPhilBench’s design hypothesis: domain adaptation closes the gap on declarative tasks (L1–L3) but is insufficient for procedural reconstruction (L4–L5). 

INVESTORBENCH [Li et al., ACL 2025; arXiv:2412.18174] is the first benchmark evaluating LLM-based agents on financial decision-making tasks spanning stocks, cryptocurrencies, and ETFs. Evaluating 13 proprietary and open-source LLMs, it focuses on sequential agent decision-making — buying, holding, selling, and rebalancing — rather than philosophical framework reconstruction. INVESTORBENCH asks whether the model makes good financial outcomes ; InvestPhilBench asks whether the model applies the 

correct procedural framework documented by the referenced investor. A model that earns positive simulated returns via a heuristic inconsistent with the named investor’s documented philosophy would score well on INVESTORBENCH but zero on InvestPhilBench’s program accuracy — the two benchmarks measure orthogonal competencies. 5XFinBench [Zhang et al., ACL 2025 Findings; arXiv:2508.15861] benchmarks 18 LLMs on 4,235 graduate-level financial reasoning examples from finance textbooks, organized around five core capabilities: terminology understanding , temporal reasoning , future forecasting , scenario planning , and numerical modeling . The best-performing text-only model (o1) achieves 67.3% overall accuracy — 12.5pp below estimated human expert performance (~80%) — with the largest gaps in temporal reasoning and scenario planning. InvestPhilBench’s L6 (Contradiction Recognition) and L7 (Scenario Application) layers directly stress-test these two capabilities in the investment philosophy domain, where temporal evolution of an investor’s views requires simultaneous 

temporal reasoning and scenario planning. XFinBench’s five-capability taxonomy directly inspired Invest-PhilBench’s question capability annotation (§5.4), and the convergent finding that C2 and C3 show the steepest performance decline across both benchmarks strengthens the cross-domain generalizability of that result. 

Synthesis. These benchmarks reveal a consistent gradient: expert–model gaps widen as task type shifts from single-answer extraction (FinanceBench: bottleneck = retrieval), to numerical program execution (FinQA: ~30pp gap), to graduate-level multi-capability reasoning (XFinBench: ~12.5pp with best models), to agent decision-making (INVESTORBENCH: high variance by investor type). InvestPhilBench occupies a position no existing benchmark fills: evaluating whether models encode and can apply the specific sequential procedural frameworks of named expert practitioners. 

Table 1: InvestPhilBench vs. Related Financial Benchmarks 

6Benchmark  Q Count  Task Type  Best Model Acc.  Human Acc.  Eval Conditions  Automated Eval  Novel Metrics FinQA  8,281  Numerical reasoning 61.2% (FinQANet)  91.2%  Closed-book  ✓ (EM + Program Acc.) Gold programs ConvFinQA  3,892 chains Multi-turn numerical ~48% (best)  ~82%  Closed/contextual  ✓ (EM)  Turn accuracy TAT-QA  16,552  Table-text hybrid QA 58.5% F1 (TAGOP)  ~90%  Closed-book  ✓ (F1)  Cross-modal FinanceBench  10,231 (150 open) Open-book fact QA ~19% (GPT-4+retrieval) ~95%  Closed/RAG/Oracle  Partial  Multi-config PIXIU  7 tasks  NLP suite  FinMA > GPT-4 on low-order — Closed/FT  ✓ (task-specific)  Instruction-tuning INVESTORBENCH ~300  Agent decision-making Varies (13 LLMs)  N/A  Agent environment  ✓ (return metrics)  Sequential agent XFinBench  4,235  Multi-cap reasoning 67.3% (o1)  ~80%  Closed-book  ✓ (accuracy)  5-capability tags 

> InvestPhilBench 243 (v0.6; 197 dev / 46 test) Phil. framework fidelity 0.906 BASP (Claude Sonnet 4.6) est. ~0.85–0.90 †
> Closed/PKB-RAG/Oracle
> ✓ (BASP: 5 metrics) OGRS, KCCS, SAP@k, IVP, CKCA

7†InvestPhilBench human-expert performance is an author estimate anchored to the cross-domain expert baselines in this row (FinQA 91.2%, XFinBench ~80%, MedQA ~87%); no InvestPhilBench human task-performance* study has yet been run. The §11.3 expert gold set calibrates the automated scoring (humans rating model answers), not human performance on the benchmark itself; a measured human baseline — domain experts answering L1–L8 — remains a separate v1.0 deliverable. Best-model and human numbers across rows are not strictly comparable (different metrics: EM/F1/accuracy vs. BASP composite) and are tabulated for landscape orientation only. The InvestPhilBench 0.906 figure is the mixed-judge W1 sanity-wave cut (§8.7), computed on the 188-question development split (the 8 expert-difficulty questions of §5.4 were authored afterward and enter the evaluation in v1.0), and is a confounded upper bound, not a unified-judge result.* 

2.2 Long-Context Vulnerabilities and Sequential Reasoning Depth 

InvestPhilBench’s L7 and L8 layers require applying multi-step frameworks to novel scenarios — a task that increases context length, sequential reasoning depth, and noise ratio simultaneously. 

Lost in the Middle [Liu et al., TACL 2024] demonstrates that LLMs systematically underperform when relevant information appears in the middle of long contexts, with accuracy dropping 20–30pp for information at position 50% of context vs. beginning or end. For InvestPhilBench’s L7 scenario application questions, where the framework card (provided in Condition C) may be followed by a long scenario before the question, gate criteria in the middle of the framework card will be disproportionately missed — an expected contributor to FM-3 at long context lengths. 

Intelligence Degradation in Long-Context LLMs [Wang et al., 2026] extends this finding to a multi-task evaluation, demonstrating that even models with 128K+ context windows show systematic reasoning quality degradation when task-relevant information is embedded in >10K tokens of context, with multi-step reasoning degrading more than factual retrieval. This has a direct implication for RAG design in Condition B: large PKB payloads (all 118 principle cards) are likely counterproductive relative to targeted retrieval of only the investor-relevant cards. 

Synthesis. Long-context degradation provides a mechanistic explanation for the L7/L8 collapse (Table 11: L7 31–52%; L8 28–47%) that is not specific to investment philosophy. This points to test-time interventions — targeted retrieval, structured prompting with framework card before scenario — as more tractable than model capacity increases for closing the L7/L8 gap. 

2.3 Declarative vs. Procedural Knowledge in LLMs 

The cognitive distinction between declarative knowledge (knowing that ) and procedural knowledge (knowing 

how ) [Anderson, 1983] provides the theoretical foundation for InvestPhilBench’s eight-layer cognitive taxonomy and its central finding of a declarative/procedural performance gap — a composite cliff in the v0.1 pilot, and a composite-vs-GRA divergence at the current frontier (§8.2). 

Anderson’s ACT* Model [Anderson, 1983] identifies declarative knowledge as propositional (factual representations stored in semantic memory) and procedural knowledge as production rules (if-then condition-action pairs compiled from repeated practice with declarative precursors). Anderson’s central prediction — that procedural knowledge is acquired through compiling declarative precursors via practice, not through declarative retrieval alone — explains why LLMs trained on text (a declarative medium) cannot reliably encode procedural frameworks: the compilation step requires active application, which text-only training cannot provide. This is the theoretical basis for a declarative →procedural deficit: models encode Buffett’s gate descriptions (declarative) but fail to encode their sequential structure and kill criteria (procedural). In the v0.1 pilot this surfaced as a 16pp L3 →L4 composite cliff; at the current frontier the composite saturates and the same deficit is exposed only by the gate-level GRA metric (§8.2, §8.7). 

Chain-of-Thought Prompting [Wei et al., NeurIPS 2022] demonstrates that prompting frontier LLMs to produce intermediate reasoning steps substantially improves accuracy on arithmetic, symbolic, and commonsense reasoning — with gains scaling with model size (present only above ~100B parameters). InvestPhilBench’s Framework-Aware CoT prompt variant (§7.4) operationalizes this for procedural frameworks: 8models are instructed to address each gate explicitly in order, state whether each kill criterion is triggered, and only then issue a final verdict. The observed +8–14pp directional improvement on L4 (n=3; direction only) is consistent with Wei et al.’s finding that CoT gains are largest on multi-step sequential tasks. 

Zero-Shot Chain-of-Thought [Kojima et al., NeurIPS 2022] establishes that the simple instruction “Let’s think step by step” — without few-shot examples — elicits coherent multi-step reasoning in models above a capability threshold. For InvestPhilBench’s evaluation protocol, the zero-shot vs. framework-aware CoT comparison (§7.4) directly tests whether generic step-by-step instruction or investor-framework-specific scaffolding is more effective for procedural reconstruction — a distinction Kojima et al. do not address for domain-expert procedural tasks. 

Process Supervision [Lightman et al., ICLR 2024; arXiv:2305.20050] extends the declarative/procedural distinction to model training: rather than rewarding models only for correct final answers (outcome su-pervision), process reward models (PRMs) provide dense per-step feedback on reasoning chain correctness. PRM-trained models achieve better mathematical reasoning accuracy and have better calibrated confidence on individual reasoning steps. For InvestPhilBench, PRM training is the natural v1.0 intervention for closing the Application Gap (Table 14): if models receive per-gate feedback on kill-criterion identification and verdict correctness, Anderson’s procedural compilation process can be approximated at training time. The GRP format (§6.3) provides exactly the structured annotation required to generate per-gate training signals. 

LLMs Distracted by Irrelevant Context [Shi et al., ICML 2023] demonstrates that adding irrelevant but plausible context to arithmetic reasoning problems causes frontier models to incorporate it, degrading accuracy by 17–65%. The most damaging distractor type is domain-plausible but question-irrelevant information — precisely the structure of InvestPhilBench’s L7 scenario application questions, where the model must correctly identify which financial metrics are relevant to each specific gate of the named investor’s framework. FM-5 (Operationalization Flattening) may partly reflect this distraction mechanism rather than pure knowledge absence. 

seqBench [Ramezanali et al., EMNLP 2025; arXiv:2509.16866] is a tunable benchmark that quantifies the sequential-reasoning limits of LLMs by independently varying logical depth, the number of backtracking steps, and the noise ratio. Its core finding — accuracy collapses sharply beyond a model-specific logical depth, even for top-performing models on tasks of minimal search complexity — directly motivates InvestPhilBench’s Kendall τ gate-ordering metric (§7.14). seqBench’s domain-agnostic result establishes that the sequential-reasoning failure InvestPhilBench observes on L4 framework reconstruction is not specific to financial reasoning but reflects a general limitation in transformer sequential encoding. 

Synthesis. The declarative/procedural literature establishes three key predictions for InvestPhilBench: (1) a declarative →procedural deficit is theoretically expected — surfacing as an L3 →L4 composite cliff for weaker models and as a composite-vs-GRA gap at the frontier (§8.2); (2) CoT prompting is the most accessible intervention but is bounded by the Application Gap; and (3) process supervision provides the training-time path to closing that gap. The seqBench result adds a cross-domain empirical anchor: L4 sequential-reasoning failures are part of a broader pattern, not a domain-specific artifact. 

2.4 Financial Domain-Specific Language Models 

A parallel line of work has adapted or trained language models specifically for financial text, providing the domain-specific embedding and generation capacity that InvestPhilBench’s evaluation pipeline depends on. 

FinBERT [Araci, 2019; arXiv:1908.10063] fine-tunes BERT on financial news corpora to produce domain-calibrated sentiment representations. Sentiment classification accuracy on financial news improves 15–20pp relative to general-purpose BERT — a domain-adaptation gain that directly informs InvestPhilBench’s IVP metric design. The IVP (Investor Voice Precision) metric uses FinBERT-family embeddings for pairwise investor-voice similarity computation, on the basis that financial vocabulary (“margin of safety,” “free cash flow,” “reflexivity”) has domain-specific distributional properties that generic embeddings underweight. FinBERT’s success also raises the question — directly addressed by the FM-4 (Voice Diffusion) detection problem — of whether fine-tuning on generic financial text inadvertently collapses investor-specific voice distinctions. 9BloombergGPT [Wu et al., 2023; arXiv:2303.17564] is the first large-scale financial language model trained on a curated 363B-token financial corpus (Bloomberg news, filings, earnings transcripts) combined with general-purpose text. BloombergGPT achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple financial NLP tasks while remaining competitive on general benchmarks. For InvestPhilBench, its training corpus overlap with the InvestPhilBench primary-source material is a direct contamination concern: Bloomberg earnings transcripts, shareholder letter excerpts, and interview summaries are plausibly included in the 363B-token corpus. This motivates InvestPhilBench’s contamination detection protocol (§11.6) and its L7/L8 dynamic perturbation design (§6.5). BloombergGPT’s architecture also establishes that general-purpose frontier models match or exceed domain-adapted models on complex reasoning tasks — corroborated by InvestPhilBench’s pilot results, where GPT-4o and Claude 3.5 Sonnet outperform smaller domain-adapted models on L4–L8. 

Financial Statement Analysis with LLMs [Kim et al., 2024; SSRN 4762860] reports that GPT-4 prompted with structured analyst-style frameworks achieves predictive accuracy on next-year earnings direction (52.7%) exceeding both human analysts and simpler ML models — with performance sensitive to the quality of the analytical framework in the system prompt. (We treat this figure as indicative : the underlying preprint was subsequently withdrawn pending a data review, so the specific 52.7% should not be read as settled; InvestPhilBench relies only on the qualitative point that framework-quality scaffolding closes model–human gaps.) This finding is directly relevant to InvestPhilBench’s Condition C (oracle) design: providing well-structured analytical scaffolding substantially closes model–human gaps on complex financial tasks, exactly as the oracle condition isolates the application gap (residual gap even with the full framework card provided) from the knowledge gap. 

ChatGPT for Stock Forecasting [Lopez-Lira and Tang, 2023; arXiv:2304.07619] is the first systematic test of LLM-derived sentiment scores predicting next-day stock returns. Their finding — that ChatGPT-positive headlines generate statistically significant positive next-day abnormal returns — contextualizes the practical stakes of investment philosophy accuracy for InvestPhilBench: if LLM outputs influence portfolio positioning, the FM-5 (Operationalization Flattening) failure mode carries direct financial risk. A model that flattens Graham’s mechanical margin-of-safety screen into Buffett’s intrinsic value estimation would generate systematically incorrect investment signals at the point of application. 

Financial Phrase Bank [Malo et al., JASIST 2014] provides the foundational sentiment resource (FPB): 4,840 manually annotated financial news sentences classified by domain experts. FPB’s expert-annotation methodology — requiring annotators to distinguish technically neutral from semantically negative phrasing — directly parallels InvestPhilBench’s principle-card annotation protocol, where investor-stated vs. author-inferred vs. community-consensus interpretations require analogous domain calibration. 

Synthesis. The financial LLM literature reveals a consistent finding: domain-specific adaptation yields large gains on lower-order financial NLP tasks (classification, sentiment, NER) but does not close the gap on complex reasoning relative to general-purpose frontier models. This directly parallels InvestPhilBench’s pilot results, where closed-book performance on L1–L3 is consistent across model families while the L4–L8 gap grows at the capability frontier. Procedural framework encoding is not a matter of financial vocabulary but of knowledge architecture — a failure mode that domain adaptation cannot resolve. 

2.5 Quantitative Evaluation of Open-Ended LLM Outputs 

Automated evaluation of free-text LLM responses is an active and contested research area. InvestPhilBench’s BASP pipeline draws on five distinct paradigms, each with specific limitations relevant to the benchmark’s claims. 

G-Eval [Liu et al., EMNLP 2023] achieves near-human-level evaluation alignment by combining chain-of-thought rubric decomposition with probability-weighted scoring: the LLM judge is prompted with an explicit evaluation form, and the score is computed as Score = ∑ 

> i

si · P (si|form, response ), using the model’s own next-token probabilities over score values. On text summarization tasks, G-Eval achieves Spearman ρ = 0.514 with human judgments, substantially outperforming ROUGE and BERTScore on coherence and consistency dimensions. InvestPhilBench adopts G-Eval for the holistic rubric dimensions of L6 and L8 scoring, where binary correctness is inappropriate. However, G-Eval’s probability-weighting approach is sensitive to the judge LLM’s intrinsic biases, motivating InvestPhilBench’s cross-model judging protocol (§11.2). 10 BERTScore [Zhang et al., ICLR 2020] computes token-level semantic similarity between candidate and reference text using IDF-weighted greedy matching of contextual BERT embeddings. InvestPhilBench adapts BERTScore for the IVP metric by replacing standard BERT with FinBERT embeddings to compute pairwise investor-voice similarity — directly measuring whether a model response has the lexical and conceptual signature of the attributed investor rather than a plausible-but-undifferentiated financial style. 

AlignScore [Zha et al., ACL 2023] learns a unified factual consistency scoring function from 4.7 million diverse alignment examples spanning NLI, QA, summarization, paraphrase, and information extraction. InvestPhilBench adapts AlignScore’s claim-level architecture for KCCS: each principle-card criterion is treated as a claim to be verified in the model response, and KCCS F1 measures the fraction of required elements detected. The key departure is that InvestPhilBench’s reference is a structured JSON principle card rather than prose — requiring a claim-extraction preprocessing step to linearize operationalization fields. 

CheckList [Ribeiro et al., ACL 2020] introduces behavioral testing via three test types: Minimum Func-tionality Tests (MFTs), Directional Invariance tests (DIRs), and Invariance tests (INVs). CheckList exposed systematic failures in commercial sentiment classifiers that standard test-set evaluation missed entirely. Invest-PhilBench’s FMDP detection rules adopt CheckList’s MFT-style logic: each failure mode has a computable detection criterion that functions as an MFT — FM-2 (Temporal Conflation) fires when |year_response 

− year_ground_truth| > 2; FM-3 (Kill Criterion Omission) fires when kill-criterion rate < 0.50; FM-5 (Operationalization Flattening) fires when GCF_det < 0.70. 

SummEval [Fabbri et al., TACL 2021] provides a comprehensive re-evaluation of 23 summarization evaluation methods across four quality dimensions (coherence, consistency, fluency, relevance), establishing that no automated metric achieves consistently high correlation with human judgments across all four. This dimension-selectivity directly motivates BASP’s five-metric battery: OGRS captures gate-sequence accuracy; KCCS captures concept coverage; SAP@k captures source attribution precision; IVP captures investor voice fidelity; CKCA captures kill criterion activation accuracy — five dimensions that no single metric in the SummEval battery addresses. 

HELM [Liang et al., TMLR 2023] benchmarks 30 LLMs across 42 scenarios and 7 metrics (accuracy, calibration, robustness, fairness, bias, toxicity, efficiency), establishing that any single-axis metric creates perverse optimization incentives. HELM’s finding that top-accuracy models are often miscalibrated has a direct InvestPhilBench analogue in FM-2: models state incorrect source years with high surface confidence. HELM also introduced the multi-metric radar-chart visualization that InvestPhilBench adapts for BASP score profiles (§D.2). 

Synthesis. The automated evaluation literature converges on two lessons particularly relevant to Invest-PhilBench. First, no single metric achieves reliable human alignment across all evaluation dimensions — the BASP’s five-metric battery is the principled response. Second, LLM-as-judge approaches achieve higher human alignment than token-overlap metrics on complex dimensions but introduce provider-specific biases — motivating cross-model judging as InvestPhilBench’s default protocol. BASP human-alignment is measured on a 100-item expert gold set (composite Pearson r = 0.72; §11.3); a fully-independent dual-human replication remains a v1.0 robustness item. 

2.6 Dynamic Benchmarking and Contamination Mitigation 

The risk that benchmark questions appear in model pre-training data — data contamination — has emerged as a central methodological concern as training corpora grow to web-scale [Dong et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025]. 

Generalization or Memorization [Dong et al., ACL 2024 Findings] constructs a contamination taxonomy (verbatim overlap, paraphrase overlap, structural overlap) and demonstrates that even structural contamination inflates model accuracy by 3–8pp on MMLU and HumanEval. GPT-4-Turbo and Claude-3-Opus show statistically significantly higher accuracy on questions with >50% n-gram overlap to likely training sources. This motivates InvestPhilBench’s contamination detection protocol (§11.6): for living investors, post-cutoff writings (2024–2026 letters and memos) will be used to construct L7/L8 scenario application questions whose textual grounding is verifiably post-training. 11 Benchmarking LLMs Under Data Contamination: A Survey from Static to Dynamic Evaluation 

[Chen et al., arXiv 2025] catalogues the shift from static benchmarks to dynamic evaluation, in which slot-substitution-style perturbation — replacing named entities, numerical values, and date references while preserving question structure — is a leading contamination-resistance strategy. InvestPhilBench independently adopts an analogous strategy in §6.5: L7 scenario application questions use metric substitution , temporal displacement , and sector rotation to prevent direct training-data recall. The survey’s central design principle — that a contamination-resistant benchmark must require application of a structure to perturbed inputs rather than recall of a memorized instance — directly motivates InvestPhilBench’s perturbation design. 

Synthesis. Static benchmarks are systematically unreliable for evaluating frontier models trained on web-scale data. InvestPhilBench’s dynamic perturbation design for L7–L8, its temporal-displacement protocol for living investors, and its dual-accuracy GRP evaluation (separating label recall from procedural application) collec-tively implement the contamination-resistant design principles that Dong et al. and Chen et al. recommend. A structure-specific motivation reinforces these general principles: investment philosophy frameworks are sequential decision trees, not factual claims, so even a memorized gate structure must be applied to perturbed scenarios rather than reproduced. 

2.7 Expert-Domain Benchmarks Beyond Finance 

InvestPhilBench’s eight-layer cognitive taxonomy and declarative/procedural deficit parallel findings across multiple expert-knowledge domains. 

MMLU [Hendrycks et al., ICLR 2021] evaluates LLMs across 57 academic subjects including a Finance and Economics subtask (57 multiple-choice questions at undergraduate level). State-of-the-art models (GPT-4: ~90%) substantially outperform random chance on MMLU Finance, suggesting that financial declarative knowledge is well-represented in pre-training corpora. InvestPhilBench’s L1–L3 performance (73–87% across models) is consistent with MMLU Finance baselines — validating that InvestPhilBench’s declarative tasks are appropriately calibrated. 

MedQA [Jin et al., Applied Sciences 2021] benchmarks LLMs on USMLE clinical reasoning chains of 3–7 steps. The expert–model gap has narrowed dramatically with frontier models (~87% for both humans and GPT-4) but remains large for procedural clinical reasoning (differential diagnosis as a sequential gate-elimination process). The 20pp gap between single-step and multi-step clinical reasoning mirrors InvestPhilBench’s procedural deficit (the L3 →L4 composite cliff in the pilot; the composite-vs-GRA gap at the frontier, §8.2) — a convergent finding that procedural expert reasoning is the hardest frontier regardless of domain. 

LegalBench [Guha et al., NeurIPS 2023] evaluates 162 distinct legal reasoning tasks spanning issue spotting, rule recall, rule application, interpretation, and rhetorical understanding. GPT-4 achieves high accuracy on rule recall but drops 15–25pp on rule application tasks requiring sequential elimination of alternatives. This directly parallels InvestPhilBench’s declarative/procedural deficit and motivates the KCCS metric: legal “issue spotting” is the exact analogue of InvestPhilBench’s gate kill-criterion identification, and LegalBench establishes that this specific sub-task is systematically harder than rule recall across multiple frontier models. 

TruthfulQA [Lin et al., ACL 2022] benchmarks LLM truthfulness on questions where common human misconceptions are expected to mislead models trained on human-generated text. Its key finding — that larger models are more likely to produce confident false answers on misconception-adjacent questions (“inverse scaling”) — has a direct InvestPhilBench analogue in FM-2 (Temporal Conflation) and FM-4 (Voice Diffusion): models with more financial pre-training exposure may be more likely to produce confident but incorrect investor attributions, having learned surface association patterns (“margin of safety” ↔ Buffett) without the precision distinctions that correct attribution requires. The systematic 1986 →1990 owner earnings year error (§9) is a TruthfulQA-class phenomenon: models produce a confident, plausible-sounding wrong year because 1990 co-occurs more frequently with “owner earnings” in training data than 1986. 

Synthesis. The expert-domain benchmark literature establishes a cross-domain pattern with high evidential value: procedural gap ≈ 15–30pp across finance (InvestPhilBench), medicine (MedQA), and law (LegalBench), while declarative performance aligns at the frontier level across all three domains. This convergent pattern suggests that the procedural deficit InvestPhilBench targets is not a benchmark artifact but a genuine 12 structural limitation of current LLMs on sequential expert-knowledge reasoning (carried at the frontier by the gate-level GRA metric, the BASP composite having saturated; §8.2, §8.7) — one that appears regardless of domain or task surface form. 

# 3. Structural LLM Vulnerabilities 

Table 2: InvestPhilBench Layer-to-Vulnerability Mapping  

> Layer

Primary Vulnerability Mechanism Expected Impact L1: Principle Identifica-tion Entity-level hallucination Low — well-represented in training Minimal L2: Source Attribution Document/temporal confabulation Plausible but mis-dated citation Moderate (FM-2) L3: Operational-ization Operationalization flattening Surface semantics overriding precision Moderate (FM-5) L4: Framework Reconstruc-tion Sequential reasoning limits Hallucinated gates, kill-criterion omission High (FM-1/FM-3) L5: Cross-Investor Comparison Investor voice diffusion Embedding space collapse for similar investors High (FM-4) L6: Contra-diction Recognition Sanitization / temporal-collapse bias Training corpus canonizes idealized versions Moderate (FM-2) L7: Scenario Application Long-context + sequential depth Noise ratio degradation + 8+ gate chains Severe L8: Novel Extrapola-tion Maximum logical depth + investor diffusion Sequential limit exceeded + persona collapse Maximum (FM-4+6) 

# 4. The InvestPhilBench Cognitive Taxonomy 

Table 3: The Eight-Layer Cognitive Taxonomy for Investment Philosophy  

> Layer

Tier Designation Operational Description Benchmark Task Example L1 Factual Re-trieval Principle Identification Identify a specific underlying principle from a description, metaphor, or market action “What investment principle does the economic moat metaphor illustrate?” L2 Factual Re-trieval Source Attribution Correctly attribute a quote or concept to its precise primary source document “In which specific annual letter did the definition of ‘owner earnings’ first appear?” 13 Layer Tier Designation Operational Description Benchmark Task Example L3 Factual Re-trieval Operationalization Recall the concrete operational criteria (metrics, red flags) an investor uses to apply a principle “What metrics did Buffett use to validate a capital-light business model?” L4 Procedural Recon-struc-tion Framework Reconstruction Reconstruct an investor’s multi-step decision process in the correct sequential order “Reconstruct Buffett’s corporate acquisition checklist, detailing each gate and its kill criterion” L5 Procedural Recon-struc-tion Cross-Investor Comparison Synthesize and contrast the procedural approaches of two or more distinct investors “Contrast the macroeconomic positioning frameworks of Howard Marks and Ray Dalio” L6 Generative Applica-tion Contradiction Recognition Identify documented contradictions, historical tensions, or temporal evolution within an investor’s views “Detail how Buffett’s airline investments contradicted his prior stated principles” L7 Generative Applica-tion Scenario Application Apply a specific multi-step framework to a dynamically generated novel investment scenario “Apply the six-gate acquisition checklist to this SaaS company at 10 × ARR. State the verdict at each gate.” L8 Generative Applica-tion Novel Extrapolation Extrapolate an existing framework to a macroeconomic or technological development absent from training data “How would Buffett, Dalio, and Soros each analyze a programmable Central Bank Digital Currency?” Paralleling XFinBench’s five-capability taxonomy [Zhang et al., ACL 2025], each InvestPhilBench question is annotated with a capability profile indicating which of five latent reasoning capabilities it primarily exercises: (C1) Terminology precision (investor-specific vocabulary and operationalization recall), (C2) 

Temporal reasoning (historically-contextualized evolution of investor views), (C3) Scenario extrapolation 

(framework application to novel scenarios), (C4) Comparative synthesis (cross-investor differentiation under surface similarity), (C5) Procedural sequencing (correct reconstruction and ordering of multi-step decision processes). A single question may exercise multiple capabilities; the primary capability is the one most predictive of error. 

# 5. Dataset Architecture and Primary Source Integration 

Canonical version note. The canonical v0.6 release ( release_manifest_v03.json ) comprises 

118 reviewer-resolved principle cards, 25 decision-framework cards (with explicit topology_type 

/ gate_logic / topology_rationale metadata), and 243 QA questions (197 dev / 46 test; seed 20260420). The distribution tables in §5.1–§5.4 (Tables 4, 6, 7) report the v0.1 construction-time pilot snapshot that the methodology was first developed against; they are retained for provenance and should not be read as the canonical counts. All headline results and limitations (§8, §11) refer to the canonical v0.6 data unless a table is explicitly labelled “pilot.” 

5.1 Principle Knowledge Base (PKB) 

The canonical PKB is the 118-card v0.6 Knowledge Base (Table B.1); the per-investor breakdown in Table 4 is the 33-card v0.1 pilot snapshot, retained for provenance only (see the §5 version note). The PKB grew from that pilot to the 118-card v0.6 set; the description below documents the schema, which is unchanged across versions. The v0.1 pilot contains 33 annotated principle cards across nine individual 14 practitioners, structured in pkb_v01.json . Each card carries an interpretation_type field distinguishing 

investor-stated , author-inferred , and community-consensus operationalizations — investor-stated criteria require source attribution for full credit. All 33 principle cards are investor-stated and corpus-linked to specific web documents and/or YouTube transcripts from the scraped corpus (Table 7). Each principle card includes an operationalization field specifying concrete decision criteria, a primary_sources list, and a 

contradictions field documenting known cross-investor or temporal conflicts — the latter directly feeding L5 (comparison) and L6 (contradiction) question construction. 

Table 4: PKB Principle Card Distribution (v0.1 pilot snapshot; canonical v0.6 = 118 cards)  

> Investor

School Principles Framework Gates Framework Type Key Contradictions Annotated Warren Buffett Quality Com-pound-ing 8 6 linear_sequential documented airline reversal (2001 rejection → 2016 $7.7B stake → 2020 exit); intrinsic-value margin of safety vs. Graham’s mechanical net-net screen; reactive fear/greed signal vs. Marks’s active pendulum monitoring Benjamin Graham Deep Value 4 7 parallel_threshold Buffett’s abandonment of Graham’s net-net screen post-1965; Graham’s two-thirds-of-NAV operationalization differs from Buffett’s owner-earnings discount Ray Dalio Macro Systems 4 5 conditional_branch 2013 cash-as-transactional-medium framing vs. 2020–2022 defensive cash-and-gold positioning (all pre-departure from Bridgewater, October 2022) Howard Marks Contrarian Credit 3 4 conditional_branch active pendulum-temperature framework vs. Buffett’s reactive sentiment signal George Soros Reflexive Macro 3 4 conditional_branch —Joel Green-blatt Value-Quality System-atic 4 6 linear_sequential —Seth Klarman Deep Value / Risk Aver-sion 2 4 linear_sequential —Charlie Munger Multi-Disciplinary Mental Models 2 4 parallel_threshold —15 Investor School Principles Framework Gates Framework Type Key Contradictions Annotated Peter Lynch Growth at Rea-sonable Price 3 4 parallel_threshold —

Total — 33 44 total gates — 8 cross-investor contradictions 

The pilot snapshot above grew to the 118-card canonical v0.6 KB (Table B.1); planned v1.0 additions include 

author-inferred / community-consensus variants and deeper coverage for thin-corpus investors (Klarman, Munger). The PKB JSON schemas for both versions are released with the repository. 

5.2 Decision Framework Cards: Individual Practitioner Frameworks 

Framework cards encode the kinds of investment decisions that practitioners actually make: whether to buy an operating business, value a security, size a position, rebalance a portfolio, classify a macro regime, sell a holding, or terminate analysis at a hard exclusion gate. For example, Buffett’s acquisition checklist governs an all-or-nothing purchase decision, Dalio’s bubble gauge governs regime-aware risk re-duction, and Soros’s reflexive hypothesis framework governs trade construction and position sizing under feedback. Each card represents such a decision as structured JSON, capturing step name, gate description, explicit criteria, kill criteria, source quotes, and framework topology. The canonical v0.6 set contains 25 

individual-practitioner decision-framework cards, each annotated with explicit topology_type , gate_logic ,and topology_rationale metadata (§11.10). The three institutional asset-owner frameworks of §5.3 are documented as prose specifications and are not among these cards (see the §5.3 data-status note). 

Charlie Munger — Multi-Disciplinary Mental Models Framework (munger_opportunity_ evaluation ): Munger’s framework is a parallel_threshold topology requiring convergence across multiple independent analytical lenses before commitment. The framework opens with a Multi-Lens Assessment 

(Step 1) in which the evaluator arrays the investment against economics, psychology, mathematics, history, and evolutionary biology lenses — Munger’s “latticework of mental models” (USC Business School Speech, 1994). The kill criterion at Step 1 is failure to find at least three independent confirming lenses. Step 2 applies Inversion — systematically enumerating technology-disruption, management-betrayal, regulatory, competitive-moat erosion, and macro scenarios before considering upside, reflecting his maxim “Invert, always invert” (USC Law Commencement, 2007). Step 3 performs Incentive Alignment verification (compensation tied to long-term value; owner-operator skin-in-the-game). Step 4 enacts an Independence Check against common cognitive biases (confirmation bias, social proof, authority). Kill criterion: if any identified bias is driving the majority of the bull case, the position is rejected. The framework converges at a final Expected-Value Synthesis requiring dominant positive expected value across all identified scenarios. The parallel-threshold topology distinguishes Munger’s framework from Buffett’s sequential acquisition checklist: a single lens failure can be overridden by overwhelming convergence elsewhere, but cognitive-bias contamination at Step 4 is an absolute veto. The full inventory of all 25 canonical framework cards is generated directly from decision_frameworks_ v05.json in Table 5. “Kill gates” counts the steps carrying explicit kill_criteria ; topology and gate-logic are the data fields audited in §11.10. 

Table 5: Decision Framework Card Inventory (v0.6, 25 cards; generated from decision_ frameworks_v05.json )

16 Investor Framework Topology Gate logic Gates Kill gates Warren Buffett Buffett Acquisition Checklist 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 6 6Warren Buffett Buffett Owner Earnings DCF Valuation 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 3 3Warren Buffett Buffett Share Repurchase Decision Framework 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 4 0Charlie Munger Munger Business Quality and Price Checklist 

parallel_ threshold 

conjunction 5 1Charlie Munger Munger Multi-Lens Opportunity Evaluation 

parallel_ threshold 

weighted_threshold_3_of_5 5 0Benjamin Graham Graham Defensive Investor Portfolio Selection 

parallel_ threshold 

conjunction 7 0Benjamin Graham Graham Intrinsic Value and Margin of Safety 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 4 0Benjamin Graham Graham Net-Net Working Capital Screen 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 2 2Benjamin Graham Graham’s Seven Tests for the Defensive Investor 

parallel_ threshold 

conjunction 7 7Seth Klarman Klarman Deep Value Identification Framework 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 4 2Seth Klarman Klarman Downside-First Investment Process 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 3 3Joel Greenblatt Greenblatt Spinoff Investment Checklist 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 4 0Joel Greenblatt Magic Formula Stock-Screening Procedure 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 5 3Peter Lynch Lynch Portfolio Story Review Framework 

linear_ sequential 

disjunction 4 017 Investor Framework Topology Gate logic Gates Kill gates Peter Lynch Lynch Six-Category Investment Framework 

conditional_ branch 

regime_dependent 4 0Howard Marks Marks Distressed Debt Investment Framework 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 5 0Howard Marks Marks Market Cycle Positioning Framework 

conditional_ branch 

regime_dependent 2 2Howard Marks Marks Risk-Return Assessment Framework 

parallel_ threshold 

weighted_threshold_3_of_5 5 0Ray Dalio All-Weather Portfolio Construction 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 3 1Ray Dalio Dalio All Weather Rebalancing Framework 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 3 0Ray Dalio Dalio Bubble Detection Gauge 

parallel_ threshold 

weighted_threshold_4_of_7 7 7Ray Dalio Dalio Debt Supercycle Navigation Framework 

conditional_ branch 

regime_dependent 2 2Ray Dalio Dalio Economic Machine Portfolio Positioning 

conditional_ branch 

regime_dependent 5 0George Soros Soros Conviction-Weighted Position Sizing 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 4 0George Soros Soros Reflexive Hypothesis Trade Construction 

linear_ sequential 

conjunction 5 0

Topology distribution: 15 linear_sequential , 6 parallel_threshold , 4 conditional_branch (matching §11.10). Gate logic spans conjunction, disjunction, regime-dependent, and two weighted-threshold variants (3-of-5 and 4-of-7). Per-step criteria, kill criteria, and source quotes for every card are in the released JSON; the Buffett acquisition checklist is worked through in full in §6.3 (Figure 5) and the Munger multi-lens framework above. 

5.3 Decision Framework Cards: Institutional Asset Owner Frameworks 

Three institutional asset-owner frameworks are discussed throughout the paper as motivating cases for the compound-kill-criterion metric (CKCA, §7.10): NBIM (Norway’s Government Pension Fund) operates a mandatory ESG exclusion gate — a Council-on-Ethics listing triggers immediate divestment regardless of financial performance; CPPIB applies a total-portfolio approach with a factor-substitutability kill — excess return attributable solely to systematic factor exposure redirects capital to passive alternatives; PIF carries a dual kill criterion — an investment must satisfy IRR hurdles and align with Saudi Vision 2030 simultaneously. 18 These are documented from Tier-2 official sources (NBIM/CPPIB annual reports and responsible-investment frameworks; the Government Pension Fund Act; PIF’s Santiago Principles self-assessment; see §6.1 and References). 

Data status (flagged for v1.0). Unlike the 25 individual-practitioner frameworks (Table 5), the three institutional frameworks are not yet encoded as cards in decision_frameworks_ v05.json — they currently exist only as prose specifications in this manuscript and as their under-lying Tier-2 PDFs. The CKCA metric (§7.10) and the institutional FM-3 kill-criterion-abstraction subtype (§9) are defined against these prose specifications. Encoding NBIM/CPPIB/PIF as machine-readable framework cards, and adding the corresponding QA items, is a v1.0 deliver-able; until then institutional results should be read as design illustrations rather than measured benchmark coverage. 

5.4 Pilot QA Dataset with Capability Annotations 

The expanded v0.1 pilot comprises 28 questions : the original 20 plus 8 newly constructed Greenblatt questions (one per layer, L1–L8) that close the conspicuous coverage gap noted in v12. Layer distribution: L1:4, L2:3, L3:4, L4:4, L5:4, L6:3, L7:3, L8:3. Difficulty: Easy:4, Medium:10, Hard:10, Expert:4. Investor coverage: Buffett(8), Greenblatt(8) , Dalio(4), Soros(3), Lynch(3), Graham(2), Marks(2), Munger(1), Fisher(1; legacy — Fisher is excluded from the canonical 9-investor set, see §11.7), Klarman(1). The Greenblatt questions include two Gold Reasoning Programs (L4: Magic Formula reconstruction; L7: scenario application to a mid-cap industrial company), adding a second linear_sequential framework to the GRP-annotated set alongside Buffett. The full expanded QA set is released as investphilbench_qa_ expanded.json .

Table 6: Question Capability Profile Distribution (v0.1 pilot)  

> Capability

Primary in n Questions Predominant Layers C1: Terminology precision 5 L1, L2, L3 C2: Temporal reasoning 3 L2, L6 C3: Scenario extrapolation 5 L7, L8 C4: Comparative synthesis 4 L5, L8 C5: Procedural sequencing 8 L4, L5, L7 

Consistent with XFinBench [Zhang et al., 2025], temporal reasoning (C2) and scenario extrapolation (C3) questions show the steepest performance drop in the pilot (L6: 39–58%, L7: 31–52%), while terminology precision (C1) questions achieve the highest scores (L1: 73–87%). 

v0.6 Expert-Difficulty L4 Hard Question Set. Analysis of per-gate GRA scores from the sanity-wave Claude Sonnet 4.6 evaluation revealed four systematic failure patterns (Figure 2): (1) verdict misclassification 

— gate names correctly retrieved but the response maps the gate to the wrong normalized verdict, e.g. a soft screen treated as PROCEED when the gold program requires REJECT , or an evidentiary gap treated as REJECT rather than INCONCLUSIVE ; legacy annotator shorthand such as FILTER, KILL, FAIL, PASS, and RANK is mapped to the binary rejection-vs-qualifying classes the GRA judge scores (rejection = FILTER/KILL/FAIL ≡ §7.3 REJECT; qualifying = PASS/RANK ≡ §7.3 PROCEED) before scoring; (2) element omission — gate named, normalized verdict correct, but required_elements partially cited; (3) 

severity confusion — frameworks with multiple negative gate outcomes are collapsed into a single generic REJECT even when the gold program distinguishes a terminal kill from a lower-severity fail condition through 

required_elements and verdict_trigger ; (4) sparse gate numbering — hallucinated intermediate gates when a question intentionally targets non-contiguous gates (e.g., [3,6] or [1,2,3,5]). To expose these patterns in future evaluations, we added 8 expert-difficulty L4 questions ( IPB-L4H-GRA-001 through IPB-L4H-GRA-008 ) targeting: Graham gate activation with exact numeric thresholds (Q1), Marks terminal-vs-nonterminal negative-verdict severity (Q2), Munger all-negative-verdict recognition (Q3), Soros sparse gate numbering (Q4), Greenblatt all-negative explanation (Q5), Klarman 3-element catalyst gate completeness (Q6), Dalio 19 5-gate full reconstruction with specific signals (Q7), and Buffett sparse Gates 3+6 rejection explanation (Q8). All 8 questions have gold programs with ≥2 required_elements per gate; most existing L4 questions had only 1 required_element per gate. These 8 questions are merged into questions_v04.json (243 total), with splits regenerated using the same seed (20260420): dev=197, test=46. (The dev count moves from 188 to 197 — not 188+8=196 — because the stratified split is recomputed over the full 243-item set rather than appended to the prior dev split; the test split correspondingly resolves to 46.) 

Figure 2: GRA failure-pattern hardening map. The W1 gate-level analysis identified four recurring failure families: wrong normalized verdict, omitted required elements, negative-verdict severity confusion, and hallucinated gates under sparse numbering. The eight v0.6 L4H questions deliberately target these families rather than adding generic hard questions, so they should be read as adversarial hardening items first evaluated in v1.0, not as W1 evaluation data. 

5.5 Pilot Question Selection Protocol 

Questions selected via stratified sampling. In the expanded pilot (28 questions), Buffett and Greenblatt each have 8 questions (29%), reflecting Buffett’s largest principle card count and Greenblatt’s status as the only investor with a fully scraped corpus (258,558 combined words — Table 7) but zero original pilot coverage. The Expert-difficulty L8 CBDC scenario topical correlation is acknowledged as a pilot limitation — v1.0 will enforce maximum 4 questions per investor, mandatory topic diversity at Expert level, and will progress toward balanced coverage across all 15 individual framework-card holders. 

5.6 Conceptual Curation Gate 

After the structural data audit, we added an explicit ontology separating core investment principles/frameworks from adjacent mental models, named portfolio strategies, management or life principles, duplicates, and weakly grounded items. This gate was motivated by cases such as Dalio’s radical transparency and believability-weighted decision-making, which are important Bridgewater operating principles but not direct risk-parity or asset-allocation principles. Similarly, All Weather is treated as a portfolio strategy and the Economic Machine as a macro explanatory model unless an item documents explicit investment action gates. The curated core keeps only items that directly govern security selection, valuation, risk, portfolio construction, market cycles, position sizing, capital allocation, or an evidence-to-action investment procedure. Adjacent items remain available in curation appendices but are not counted as core benchmark knowledge. 20 6. Data Construction Methodology 

Figure 3: Benchmark construction-and-evaluation pipeline (schematic). Five stages: primary sources (9 investors, 1.67 M words) → knowledge base (118 principle cards + 25 frameworks with topology metadata) 

→ QA benchmark (243 questions, L1–L8, with gold reasoning programs for L4/L7) → evaluation (4 W1 models, scaling to 10; three conditions; BASP + GRA) → diagnosis (provider-tier split; composite saturation vs. the gate-level GRA gap; FMDP × 6 failure modes). 

6.1 Source Selection Hierarchy 

Principle cards and framework citations follow a six-tier priority order (higher tiers override lower tiers when operationalizations conflict): 1. Tier 1 — Investor-authored books and official shareholder letters (e.g., canonical texts; Berkshire Hathaway annual letters in official PDF form). 2. Tier 2 — Official institutional mandates and annual reports (sovereign wealth and public pension frameworks: NBIM, CPPIB, PIF). 3. Tier 3 — Official digital essays and research publications (e.g., Bridgewater Research & Insights, Oaktree Capital memos, Soros essays, Berkshire.com letters). 4. Tier 4 — Primary-source video interviews. Long-form interviews in which the investor speaks in the first person; provenance is fixed via YouTube Data API metadata ( video_id , channel, published_ at , view_count ) and English transcripts ( transcript_language , transcript_word_count ). Clips that are purely third-party commentary without the investor’s voice are excluded. The v0.1 corpus includes 258 such transcripts across nine individual practitioners (~1.28M spoken words). These sources are essential for temporal and contradiction tasks (L6) where spoken remarks span multiple dates and may diverge from written-only narratives. 5. Tier 5 — Curated digital archives that reproduce or faithfully excerpt primary text (e.g., Farnam-Street, Acquirer’s Multiple), used when Tier 1–3 URLs are unavailable or when the archive provides a stable citation. 6. Tier 6 — Secondary synthesis (aggregators, summaries); permitted only under interpretation_ type: community-consensus and cannot satisfy investor-stated attribution requirements alone. 

Table 7: PKB Primary Source Corpus (v0.1) — Written Documents and YouTube Transcripts 

21 Investor  Written docs  Written words  Primary written sources (examples)  YT transcripts  Spoken words  v0.1 pilot Qs Warren Buffett 21  174,993  Berkshire Hathaway Annual Letters (2004–2024) 30  97,797  8Charlie Munger 16  26,736  FarnamStreet (Munger essays/speeches)  18  53,947  1Ray Dalio  30  79,654  Bridgewater Research & Insights  30  143,847  4Howard Marks 12  42,510  Oaktree Capital — Howard Marks memos 30  201,779  2George Soros 30  35,971  George Soros essays  30  130,578  3Seth Klarman 22  9,570  Acquirer’s Multiple; FarnamStreet  30  174,119  1Benjamin Graham 3 3,188  Benjamin Graham Archive (FarnamStreet) 30  111,446  2Peter Lynch 20  11,449  Acquirer’s Multiple  30  114,619  3Joel Greenblatt 23  10,539  Acquirer’s Multiple; FarnamStreet  30  248,019  0

> Total  177  394,610  — 258  ~1,276,151  20

22 Combined written + spoken word counts are used in §11 (coverage asymmetry). Institutional frameworks (NBIM, CPPIB, PIF) are documented from Tier-2 PDFs and reports and are not included in this table. All Table 7 figures were programmatically verified against the released corpus artifacts (Phase 1 audit; zero discrepancies). 

Figure 4: Written vs. spoken corpus asymmetry by investor. The bar chart stacks written-document words and primary YouTube-transcript words as percentages of each investor’s combined corpus. Buffett is the only written-dominant investor (64.1% written), Dalio/Munger/Soros are mixed, and the remaining five investors are Tier-4 dominant (>80% spoken). This asymmetry drives source-design choices: Buffett supports document-level L2 provenance questions, while Graham/Greenblatt/Klarman/Lynch/Marks require more careful treatment of interview-derived evidence. 

The written/spoken asymmetry has direct implications for benchmark task design. Buffett is the only investor whose corpus is written-dominant (64.1%), making him uniquely suited for L2 (source attribution) questions that test document-level provenance. Graham and Greenblatt are almost entirely spoken-corpus-dependent (>95%), meaning L6 (contradiction) and L2 (source attribution) tasks for these investors must account for the provenance limitations of YouTube-sourced content. 

Table 8: Distinctive Investor Phrases Used for Voice-Diffusion Diagnostics  

> Investor

Distinctive phrases / concepts Diagnostic use Warren Buffett circle of competence; owner earnings; economic moat; margin of safety; be fearful when others are greedy Distinguishes quality-compounding and intrinsic-value language from generic value investing Charlie Munger latticework of mental models; invert, always invert; incentives; elementary worldly wisdom; sit on your ass investing Tests whether multi-disciplinary reasoning is preserved rather than collapsed into Buffett-style quality language 23 Investor Distinctive phrases / concepts Diagnostic use Benjamin Graham net-net; two-thirds of net current asset value; Mr. Market; defensive investor; margin of safety Separates mechanical asset-value screening from Buffett’s owner-earnings valuation Ray Dalio economic machine; debt cycle; all weather; risk parity; cash is trash Marks macro-system and regime language distinct from Soros reflexivity Howard Marks pendulum; second-level thinking; risk control; market cycle temperature; most important thing Identifies active cycle-temperature monitoring rather than generic contrarianism George Soros reflexivity; boom-bust sequence; fallibility; feedback loop; asymmetric bet sizing Captures hypothesis-testing and feedback dynamics absent from Dalio’s systematic macro language Seth Klarman absolute return; downside protection; catalyst; mispriced liquidation value; patience Separates risk-first deep value from Graham’s formulaic screens and Buffett’s quality compounding Peter Lynch tenbagger; stalwart; fast grower; story stock; buy what you know Preserves retail-growth taxonomy and narrative company-story evaluation Joel Greenblatt magic formula; earnings yield; return on capital; spinoff; special situation Separates systematic value-quality ranking from discretionary value-investor prose 

Table 8 clarifies the purpose of the corpus lexical profile: the benchmark does not use raw frequency words such as “market” and “price” as substantive findings. Instead, investor-specific phrase sets define a face-valid reference for FM-4 (Voice Diffusion) and IVP/SDI diagnostics: a response that replaces Soros’s “reflexivity” with generic macro-cycle language, or Graham’s net-net screen with Buffett-style owner earnings, loses voice fidelity even when the high-level investment theme remains plausible. 

6.2 Five-Phase Ground Truth Construction Phase 0 — Automated corpus construction and linkage. Written documents and YouTube interview transcripts are collected into per-investor JSON artifacts. Web: scrape or fetch investor-authored PDFs and HTML from official domains (e.g., berkshirehathaway.com letters, bridgewater.com ,

oaktreecapital.com ) and from curated archives (FarnamStreet, Acquirer’s Multiple) with title , url ,

date , source_name , text , and word_count . YouTube: YouTube Data API v3 search → video metadata 

→ transcript extraction; a transcript is retained when transcript_language = "en" and transcript_ word_count > 200 . Each record includes provenance fields ( scraped_at or fetch timestamp) to support replication and contamination analysis. Aggregated counts appear in Table 7. Corpus linkage: An automated enrichment pipeline then cross-references each PKB principle card, decision framework card, and QA question against the full scraped corpus via keyword overlap and quote matching. The resulting corpus_ references (principles/frameworks) and corpus_evidence (QA) fields provide direct provenance links — specific document titles, URLs, video IDs, and relevance scores — enabling traceability from any benchmark element to its primary-source evidence in the released corpus. A comprehensive corpus_index.json (9 investors, 177 web documents, 258 YouTube transcripts, 1.67M combined words) serves as the master registry for all scraped artifacts. 24 Phase 0a — Data quality audit. All Table 7 figures were programmatically verified against the released corpus JSON artifacts ( _index.json manifests and per-investor files). The audit confirmed zero discrepancies across all 9 investors for document counts, word counts, and transcript counts. Extended statistics (Figure 4: written/spoken asymmetry; Table 8: distinctive phrase profile) were computed from the full corpus to inform benchmark design decisions and FM-4 (Voice Diffusion) detection baselines. 

Phase 1 — Principle extraction. Candidate principles are extracted per investor from the Tier 1/3/4 corpus (LLM-assisted, author-reviewed), each anchored to a canonical quote and a dated source document. 

Phase 2 — Cross-verification. Each candidate is verified against at least one independent corpus source; items that cannot be independently confirmed are demoted to author-inferred or dropped. Phase 3 — Operationalization tagging. Verified principles are annotated with concrete metrics, red flags, and kill criteria, with interpretation_type distinguishing investor-stated from author-inferred operationalizations (§5.1). Phase 4 — QA generation and perturbation design. Questions are generated per layer with evaluation rubrics and corpus_evidence links, subject to the career-boundary filter of §11.6; L7/L8 items additionally receive the dynamic-perturbation treatment of §6.5. 

6.3 Gold Reasoning Program Annotation 

Inspired by FinQA’s gold reasoning program design [Chen et al., 2021] — which annotates the complete arithmetic operation sequence for each numerical question, enabling dual evaluation of final answer correctness (execution accuracy) and reasoning path correctness (program accuracy) — InvestPhilBench attaches gold reasoning programs (GRPs) wherever the released QA item has an explicit procedural target. In the canonical v0.6 file this is broader than the early design shorthand of “L4/L7 only”: 154/243 questions carry a 

gold_program object across all eight layers, but most lower-layer programs contain only one or two atomic checks. The sequential-procedure claims in this paper therefore rest on the multi-gate subset, especially the L4/L7 framework questions and the ≥3-gate hardening items, while single-gate GRPs are used mainly for consistent scoring and provenance. A GRP is a structured object specifying: 

{"question_id": "IPB-P-011", "layer": "L7", "framework": "buffett_acquisition_checklist", "gold_program": [ {"gate": 1, "name": "Circle of Competence", "verdict": "PROCEED", "kill_criterion": null ,"required_elements": ["subscription economics", "retention metric", "comprehensible"]}, {"gate": 2, "name": "Economic Moat", "verdict": "PROCEED", "kill_criterion": null ,"required_elements": ["switching costs", "pricing power", "retention >= 90%"]}, {"gate": 3, "name": "Management Integrity", "verdict": "INCONCLUSIVE", "kill_criterion": null ,"required_elements": ["data_insufficiency_acknowledged"]}, {"gate": 4, "name": "Intrinsic Value Estimation", "verdict": "PROCEED", "kill_criterion": null ,"required_elements": ["owner_earnings_or_FCF", "maturity_margin", "discount_rate"], "computed_value": "~$25B"}, {"gate": 5, "name": "Margin of Safety", "verdict": "REJECT", "kill_criterion": "price_exceeds_intrinsic_value", 

25 "required_elements": ["price $50B", "intrinsic ~$25B", "2x premium"], "kill_triggered": true }, {"gate": 6, "name": "Holding Period Economics", "verdict": "N/A", "kill_criterion": "terminated_by_gate_5", "required_elements": []} ], "investment_verdict": "DECLINE", "verdict_trigger": "gate_5_reject" }

Schema note. The JSON above is the target GRP schema, shown fully populated for clarity. In the v0.6 release the gold-program gates use legacy verdict labels ( PASS / FAIL / FILTER / KILL / RANK ), carry 

required_elements but no separate kill_criterion field, and do not populate a top-level investment_ verdict . The GRA judge collapses each gate’s legacy verdict to a rejection (FILTER / KILL / FAIL ≡

§7.3 REJECT) vs qualifying (PASS / RANK ≡ §7.3 PROCEED) class — a binary match with no separate INCONCLUSIVE class; kill semantics are read from the rejection verdict and verdict_trigger (§7.7), and the final decision target is grounded as described in the next paragraph; explicit kill_criterion and 

investment_verdict annotation is a v1.0 schema upgrade. The fully-populated form is therefore the schema the metrics are defined against, not a verbatim copy of every released record. The GRP enables dual evaluation analogous to FinQA: verdict accuracy (is the final INVEST/DECLINE or DECLINE-equivalent action correct when the item defines one?) and program accuracy (is the gate sequence, with correct verdicts and kill semantics, reconstructed?). In the current release, investment_ verdict is not populated uniformly across all GRPs. In the W1 cut, L7 verdict correctness is captured by the OGRS judge rubric (§7.6) rather than a separate deterministic VerdictAcc. The planned VerdictAcc scorer — grounding the final target in investment_verdict when present, otherwise deriving it from the terminal gate verdict and verdict_trigger / ground-truth answer fields, and excluding items with no recoverable decision target rather than assigning a placeholder — is a v1.0 deliverable. OGRS and KCCS together operationalize program accuracy. 

GRP annotation agreement : κ = 0.86 for gate verdict assignments, κ = 0.78 for kill criterion identification (v0.1 pilot: n=20 questions, two annotators; consistent with FinQA’s reported inter-annotator agreement for program annotation). The full v0.6 GRP set is single-annotated; see §11.8. 

6.4 Inter-Annotator Agreement 

All inter-annotator estimates in this section are from the v0.1 20-question pilot (two annotators): Cohen’s 

κ = 0.82 (overall three-tier rubric); κ = 0.76 (SAA context-level sub-metric); κ = 0.86 (GRP gate verdicts); 

κ = 0.78 (GRP kill criterion identification). They carry wide CIs at n=20 and do not extend to the full v0.6 set, whose GRPs are single-annotated (§11.8); v1.0 will provide reliable estimates. 

6.5 Dynamic Perturbation Design 

The contamination-resistance argument of §2.6 is operationalized for L7 (Scenario Application) and L8 (Novel Extrapolation) through three perturbation operators applied to a base scenario while holding the underlying framework fixed: (i) metric substitution — replacing the numeric inputs a gate consumes (valuation multiple, ARR, growth rate) so the verdict cannot be retrieved from a memorized instance; (ii) 

scenario / sector substitution — relocating the same decision structure to a different industry; and (iii) 

temporal displacement — injecting a dated macro regime (e.g. a 2009 credit-crisis context) that activates regime-dependent gates. Because each operator preserves the gold reasoning program (gate set, kill criteria, ordering) while changing the answer , a model must apply the framework rather than recall a cached label — exactly the dynamic slot-substitution principle catalogued in the contamination-resistance literature (Chen et al., 2025; §2.6). The design is illustrated on the worked Buffett L7 instance of §6.3 ( IPB-P-011 , six-gate acquisition checklist). The base scenario triggers a Gate-5 REJECT (price ≫ intrinsic value); the three perturbations move the 26 Figure 5: Gold Reasoning Program (GRP) and gate-level scoring (schematic). Buffett’s 6-gate acquisition checklist with per-gate verdicts (PROCEED / INCONCLUSIVE / REJECT): Gate 5 (Margin of Safety) triggers the kill criterion, terminating the chain at the overall verdict DECLINE and leaving Gate 6 unreached. Gate Reconstruction Accuracy (GRA) scores each gate on a name + verdict + required-elements 

match (§7.15); per-model GRA results are in §8.7. The failure modes most directly exposed by gate-level scoring are FM-1 (Hallucinated Gate), FM-3 (Kill Criterion Omission), FM-5 (Operationalization Flattening), and FM-6 (Anachronistic Application) (§9). A fully worked numeric instance (SaaS target, $50 B price vs. ≈$25 B intrinsic value) is given in §6.3. 27 verdict in structurally meaningful ways while reusing the identical gold program: 

Table 9: Dynamic Perturbation Example for L7 Question IPB-P-011 (Buffett six-gate acquisition checklist)  

> Version

Scenario Changed variable Investment verdict Base SaaS, 10 × ARR, $5B ARR, 25% growth — DECLINE (Gate 5 REJECT) Perturbation A Industrial-automation SaaS, 7× ARR, $2B ARR, 20% growth Sector + multiple DECLINE (Gate 5 REJECT) Perturbation B SaaS, 3 × ARR, $5B ARR, 15% growth Multiple (price ~$15B < intrinsic ~$20B) INVEST (all gates PROCEED / INCONCLUSIVE) Perturbation C SaaS, 10 × ARR, $5B ARR, 25% growth, 2009 context Temporal regime DECLINE (Gate 5 + Gate 6 REJECT) 

Perturbation B (the verdict-flipping case): Gate 1 PROCEED (subscription economics, 95% measurable retention → within Buffett’s defined competence circle); Gate 2 PROCEED; Gate 3 INCONCLUSIVE (management data not provided — no kill criterion triggered, analysis continues per §7.3); Gate 4 intrinsic value ≈$20B; Gate 5 PROCEED (price ~$15B < intrinsic ~$20B); Gate 6 PROCEED. No REJECT triggered 

→ INVEST. The B-vs-base contrast — same framework, opposite verdict, driven only by the valuation multiple — is the canonical contamination probe: a model that reproduces the base DECLINE on Perturbation B is recalling a label, not applying the gate logic. 

The full perturbation generator and the per-question perturbation manifests for the L7/L8 set are released with the benchmark; the at-scale perturbation ablation (clean vs. perturbed accuracy delta per model) is part of the v1.0 multi-model run. 

# 7. Evaluation Protocol 

7.1 Models Pilot (v0.1, archived): GPT-4o, Claude 3.5 Sonnet, Gemini 1.5 Pro, Llama-3-70B-Instruct (4 models, Condition A only, n=20). 

v1.0 evaluation suite (10 models). Selection criteria, in priority order: (i) coverage of all major frontier providers to prevent single-provider artifacts; (ii) explicit reasoning vs. standard contrasts within at least two families to test whether reasoning training closes the procedural deficit; (iii) closed-source vs. open-weight parity check; (iv) at least one within-family capability ladder to test whether the deficit scales with model capability; (v) cost-tier diversity to rule out compute as the gating factor. The suite is calibrated to comparable benchmarks: XFinBench [Zhang et al., 2025] evaluated 18 models, INVESTORBENCH [Li et al., 2025] evaluated 13, and FinanceBench [Islam et al., 2023] tested 16 configurations on 150 cases. 

Table 10: v1.0 Model Evaluation Suite (10 models) 

28 Tier Model Provider Type Role Frontier reasoning GPT-5.5 OpenAI Closed; reasoning Flagship OpenAI; reasoning-trained baseline (OpenRouter slug 

openai/gpt-5.5 )Frontier reasoning Claude Opus 4.7 (reasoning) Anthropic Closed; reasoning Flagship Anthropic; thinking-token model Frontier reasoning Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview Google Closed; standard Best $/intelligence at frontier Frontier reasoning Grok 4.3 (high) xAI Closed; reasoning xAI representation; cheap frontier reasoner Frontier standard Claude Sonnet 4.6 Anthropic Closed; standard Within-Anthropic ladder (Sonnet vs. Opus) Cost-efficient Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite Google Closed; standard Cost-efficient baseline; Phase-4 reference run Open-weight reasoning DeepSeek R1 DeepSeek (MIT) Open; reasoning #1 open-source reasoner; visible CoT tokens Open-weight standard Qwen 3.5 (397B-A17B) Alibaba (Apache 2.0) Open; standard Flagship MoE on OpenRouter (qwen/qwen3.5-397b-a17b ); non-Western OSS; license-friendly Open-weight standard Llama 4 Scout Meta (Llama Community) Open; standard MoE 109B; 10M-context for L7 long scenarios Within-family probe GPT-5 OpenAI Closed; standard OpenAI within-family ladder (GPT-5 vs. GPT-5.5) 

Five capability contrasts the suite enables. (1) Frontier closed vs. open : GPT-5.5 / Opus 4.7 / Gemini 3.1 Pro vs. DeepSeek R1 / Qwen 3.5 / Llama 4 Scout. (2) Reasoning vs. standard within Anthropic : Opus 4.7 (reasoning) vs. Sonnet 4.6. (3) Reasoning vs. standard within DeepSeek : R1 (reasoning) vs. V4 Pro (non-reasoning baseline if added as optional 11th). (4) Within-family OpenAI ladder : GPT-5.5 medium vs. GPT-5 cheap. (5) Cost extreme : Grok 4.3 ($1.25/$2.50 per 1M in/out) vs. GPT-5.5 ($11.25/1M) at similar Arena Elo rank. 

API access. All models are routed through OpenRouter (https://openrouter.ai/api/v1 , OpenAI-compatible) for unified access and stable model_id pinning across the evaluation window; the embedding retriever for Condition B ( text-embedding-3-large ) uses the same endpoint. Model names in Table 10 reflect OpenRouter availability at planning time; exact slugs and provider versions will be pinned in the released run manifests at evaluation time and listed at camera-ready. Judge (v0.6). A single unified judge 

(gemini-3.1-pro ) is applied to all respondents, giving an apples-to-apples comparison and avoiding the strictness confound of the W1 mixed-judge cut (§8.7, §11.2); it is not a member of the cost-efficient respondent set used in the §8.3 pilot, so it self-judges no respondent there. Judge calls use the JSON-robustness safeguards of §7.5. (The superseded W1 sanity wave of §8.1–§8.7 used the earlier mixed assignment — Claude judging 29 GPT/Gemini, Gemini judging Claude — and its cross-tier gaps carry the §8.7 caveat.) 

Execution discipline. Dev-set runs (197 Q × 3 conditions = 591 prompts per model) executed in 5 waves: (W1) sanity wave — Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite, Claude Sonnet 4.6, GPT-5.5 medium, and Gemini 3.5 Flash on Condition A (all 4 models complete as of v0.6; 188Q dev set); (W2) closed-source main wave — Opus 4.7, Gemini 3.1 Pro, Grok 4.3; (W3) open-source wave — DeepSeek R1, Qwen 3.5, Llama 4 Scout; (W4) within-family probe — GPT-5 cheap; (W5) test-set freeze — single run of all 10 models × 46 Q × 3conditions, executed once after all dev-set tuning is complete. Estimated total API spend ≈ $200, of which the test-set wave is ≈ $35. 

7.2 Three Evaluation Conditions 

Inspired by FinanceBench’s finding that GPT-4-Turbo achieves only 11% accuracy in closed-book mode vs. substantially higher in oracle mode [Islam et al., 2023], InvestPhilBench defines three evaluation conditions enabling precise decomposition of knowledge availability effects: 

Condition A — Closed-book : Model receives only the question. No principle card or framework card provided. Tests what the model encodes from pre-training. Pilot evaluation was conducted entirely under Condition A. 

Condition B — PKB-augmented (RAG) : The model receives the question plus the top-3 PKB principle cards for the named investor, retrieved by embedding similarity (text-embedding-3-large ; cosine over the principle-summary + canonical-quote text, with a keyword fallback). The cards are injected into the respondent prompt and the model answers; it does not receive the full framework card. Tests retrieval-augmented philosophical reasoning [Lewis et al., 2020]. 

Condition C — Oracle : The model receives the question plus the authoritative source the ground truth is keyed to , injected into the respondent prompt: the gold-program framework card (matched by framework id or name) for framework-reconstruction/application questions, and/or the principle cards explicitly referenced in the ground truth for principle/contradiction questions. Tests whether models can apply a correctly specified source — i.e., isolates procedural application ability from framework knowledge .(Resolving the oracle to the exact ground-truth source, rather than a heuristically guessed framework, is essential: a mis-targeted card depresses scores by sending the model down the wrong gate structure; see §8.3.) The three-condition design provides three diagnostic quantities: - Knowledge gap = Oracle (C) − Closed-book (A): how much performance is due to missing pre-training knowledge - Retrieval vs. oracle =PKB-augmented (B) − Oracle (C): whether targeted retrieval beats full-source injection (positive in the §8.3 pilot — full-card injection over-anchors) - Application gap = 1 − Oracle (C): the irreducible reasoning gap even with complete information Conditions B and C are implemented as true model-in-the-loop settings as of v0.6 and validated on a 10-question pipeline pilot (§8.3); the full multi-model three-condition run on the 197-question dev split is a v1.0 deliverable. 

7.3 Gate-Level Terminology 

Each gate in a framework card produces one of three verdicts: PROCEED (criteria satisfied; advance to next gate), REJECT (kill criterion triggered; investment declined), or INCONCLUSIVE (evidence genuinely insufficient for determination). A gate sequence terminates at the first REJECT or, if all gates clear, with a final INVEST or DECLINE verdict for the overall framework. 

INCONCLUSIVE handling in OGRS scoring. When the ground-truth gate verdict is INCONCLUSIVE, partial credit is warranted because the evidence is by definition ambiguous — penalising a calibrated PROCEED or REJECT equally mischaracterises either as a failure of reasoning rather than a failure of information. The scoring rule is: model verdict INCONCLUSIVE receives 1.0; model verdict PROCEED or REJECT each receive 0.5. This rule applies uniformly in the OGRS verdict-accuracy term (VerdictAcc), in Table E.1 GRP rubric scoring, and in the score_response() function ( run_phase4_evaluate.py ). The 30 same rule is applied in FM-3 (Kill Criterion Omission) detection: INCONCLUSIVE gates are excluded from the FM-3 kill-criterion-rate denominator to avoid inflating false-positive kill-criterion omission rates. 

7.4 Prompting Protocol 

Zero-shot under Condition A with standardized system prompt. Framework-Aware CoT shows +8–14pp directional improvement on L4 (n=3; direction only). Full prompting-protocol analysis is deferred to the v1.0 multi-model runs. 

7.5 Structured Response Parsing (SRP) 

Before any metric is computed, model responses are parsed into a canonical representation. SRP combines pattern extraction with an LLM-based extraction model (a judge model outside the evaluated pool) to identify: the gate sequence ˆS = [ ˆg1, . . . , ˆgm] (ordered gate labels mentioned); gate verdicts ˆV = {g 7 → v :

v ∈ { PROCEED, REJECT, INCONCLUSIVE }} ; kill-criterion mentions ˆK = {g 7 → { e1, e 2, . . . }} ; source citations ˆS = {(entity, doc, context )}; and investor attributions ˆI = {(investor, action _or _claim )}.SRP reliability: inter-extraction agreement κ ≥ 0.88 for gate sequence, κ = 0.81 for kill-criterion elements (50-response calibration set, v0.1). 

Judge-call robustness (v0.6). The judge returns its verdict as a JSON object scored by the BASP pipeline. Reasoning-capable judges (e.g. gemini-3.1-pro ) spend output tokens on internal reasoning, so on long Condition B/C responses the verdict JSON could truncate mid-string and fail to parse — silently falling back to neutral 0.5 placeholder scores (up to ~79% of rows on the oracle condition before the fix, badly biasing those cells). Two safeguards make scoring robust: (i) a generous, env-overridable judge token budget (JUDGE_MAX_TOKENS , default 6000) sized for reasoning-plus-verdict output; and (ii) a single reinforced retry (“return only a complete JSON object”) before any placeholder fallback. The same safeguards apply to the per-gate GRA judge (§7.15). On the §8.3 validation pilot these reduced judge-parse failures to zero across all 60 judgments. Responses that still cannot be scored after the retry are recorded as explicit placeholders and excluded from aggregate means rather than silently averaged in. 

7.6 Metric 1: Ordered Gate Reconstruction Score (OGRS) Motivation : Kendall’s τ alone does not penalize missing gates — a response listing 3 of 6 gates in perfect order achieves τ = 1 but covers only 50% of the framework. OGRS jointly penalizes coverage and ordering failures. 

Gate Coverage Fraction (GCF): GCF = |{ g ∈ G : g ∈ ˆS}| /|G|, where G is the ground-truth gate set. 

Normalized τ (maps [−1, 1] → [0 , 1] ): τn = ( τ + 1) /2.

OGRS: OGRS = GCF × τn ∈ [0 , 1] . Perfect reconstruction (GCF = 1, τ = 1) → OGRS = 1; complete gate omission (GCF = 0) → OGRS = 0 regardless of ordering. 

Kill-criterion weighting (OGRS k): kill-criterion gates receive weight wk = 2 .0 vs. 1.0 for others; the weighted concordance count Cw = ∑ 

> (i,j ): i<j

wiwj · 1[concordant ] replaces the unweighted count in τ . OGRS k

is computed identically to OGRS but using τ derived from Cw.

7.7 Metric 2: Kill Criterion Coverage Score (KCCS) Motivation : A response may identify all gates but omit the conditions under which each kill criterion fires. KCCS measures F1 coverage of kill-criterion elements . For framework F with kill-criterion gates GK ⊆ G, let 

Eg be the ground-truth elements at gate g and ˆEg those detected. Gate-level KCCS g = 2 |Eg ∩ ˆEg |/(|Eg |+| ˆEg |);framework-level KCCS = 1 

> |GK|

∑ 

> g∈GK

KCCS g . Element detection uses exact string match for numeric thresholds and semantic match (cosine ≥ 0.82, text-embedding-3-large) for conceptual elements; the 0.82 threshold is calibrated on the 50-response validation set. 

Implementation and data-schema note. The element-level F1 form above is the metric’s conceptual 

definition and the target schema for v1.0. In the v0.6 release, gold-program gates carry required_elements 

31 and a (normalized) verdict but do not populate a separate kill_criterion field — the kill semantics are encoded in the rejection verdict ( FILTER / KILL / FAIL , normalized to REJECT per §7.3) and verdict_ trigger . Accordingly, the deployed KCCS in the evaluation harness is a judge-rubric coverage score (the judge rates, on 0–1, how completely and specifically the response captures the kill criteria for the question’s rejection gates), rather than a string-level F1 over a dedicated kill_criterion field. For kill-criterion (rejection) gates the two largely coincide, because the gate’s required_elements are precisely the conditions under which it fires; explicit per-gate kill_criterion element annotation (which will let KCCS be computed by the F1 form directly) is a v1.0 schema upgrade. 

7.8 Metric 3: Source Attribution Precision at Level k (SAP@k) 

A precision-at-level hierarchy with computable thresholds. SAP@1 (investor attribution): fraction of responses whose attributed investor matches ground truth. SAP@2 (document attribution): year within 

±1 and title edit-distance ≤ 3. SAP@3 (context attribution): chapter/section topic verified by LLM judge against the PKB source field. Under idealized extraction the levels cascade (SAP@3 ≤ SAP@2 ≤ SAP@1): a model with SAP@1 = 0.88 and SAP@2 = 0.62 is correctly identifying investors but confabulating document specifics (FM-2 pattern). In the current W1 implementation, however, the SAP@1 extractor is a stricter 

matcher (exact entity-token match) than the @2/@3 judges, which inverts the empirical ordering and renders SAP@1 uninterpretable as a knowledge signal in this cut (§8.1); aligning extractor strictness across levels is a v1.0 fix. 

7.9 Metric 4: Investor Voice Precision (IVP) 

For investor Ii, let Ri be all model responses about Ii. IVP measures how distinctly each response is represented relative to responses about every other investor on the same question: IVP (Ii) = 1

|R i|

∑ 

> Ri,j ∈R i

1

|I| − 1

∑ 

> k̸=i

(1 − cos (embed (Ri,j ), embed (Rk,j ))) 

IVP ∈ [0,1]; high IVP ( ≥ 0.70) means investor voice is well-preserved, low IVP (< 0.50) indicates FM-4 (Voice Diffusion). The FM-4 threshold of 0.50 is set against a target human-expert reference (IVP human 

≈ 0.83; author estimate, pending the §11.3 gold study). For explicit L5 pairwise comparisons, IVP i,j =1 − cos( embed (Ri), embed (Rj )) ≡ SDI i,j (micro-IVP, identical to the SDI metric). 

7.10 Metric 5: Compound Kill Criterion Accuracy (CKCA) 

Institutional frameworks (NBIM, CPPIB, PIF) carry multi-component kill criteria that OGRS/KCCS treat as ordinary gate elements. CKCA evaluates whether a model identifies which kill-criterion component triggered REJECT. NBIM : CKCA NBIM (s) = 1[ ˆg∗ = g∗] over the three independent kill gates {K2, K 3, K 5}.

CPPIB : CKCA CPPIB (s) = 1[ ˆK2 = “factor-substitutable” ] × 1[ ˆverdict 2 = REJECT ] (conjunction of correct mechanism and verdict). PIF : CKCA PIF (s) = ( 1[ ˆK2 = K2] + 1[ ˆK3 = K3]) /2 (partial credit for one of two dual-kill components). Aggregate CKCA is the macro-average over all institutional questions. 

7.11 Failure Mode Detection Protocol (FMDP) 

FMDP replaces qualitative human adjudication with algorithmic decision rules applied to the SRP-parsed response, each producing a binary FM flag with a confidence score. 

• FM-1 (Hallucinated Gate): fires when the parsed response asserts a gate absent from the applicable framework gate set — | ˆS \ G| ≥ 1 (a named/numbered gate not in G), or ˆnG > n G. For full-framework reconstruction items, G is the complete framework-card gate set. For partial-gate items whose GRP intentionally annotates only a non-contiguous subset, FM-1 is guarded by the framework card: aresponse that correctly names an unannotated but real framework gate is not counted as hallucination; it is ignored for GRA on that partial item unless it changes the terminal verdict or contradicts the requested subset. Most true FM-1 cases occur on frameworks with sparse or non-sequential gate numbering where the model invents intermediate gates absent from both the GRP and the framework card. Calibration: precision 0.762, recall 0.516. 32 • FM-2 (Temporal Conflation): fires when |ˆy − y∗| > 2 AND confidence ( ˆy) > 0.75 (where ˆy is the response year via regex filtered to ±50 years of the investor’s active period and y∗ the PKB ground-truth year), OR when documented position shifts are not date-separated — for L6/L7/L8 questions with PKB 

contradictions_or_tensions set C, ContradictionCoverage = |{ c ∈ C : c detected }| /|C| < 0.40 

(semantic match cosine ≥ 0.78). The 1986 →1990 owner-earnings error has |ˆy − y∗| = 4 . Calibration: precision 0.786, recall 0.500. 

• FM-3 (Kill Criterion Omission): with KCR det = ˆnKC /n KC (detected vs. ground-truth kill-criterion gates), fires when KCR det < 0.50 . INCONCLUSIVE gates are excluded from the denominator (§7.3). Calibration: precision 0.765, recall 0.459. 

• FM-4 (Voice Diffusion): fires when IVP (Ii) < 0.50 or any pairwise IVP i,j < 0.35 . Persona inversion 

(severe subtype): flag if argmax k cos (embed (RIi ), embed (GT Ik )) ̸ = i. Calibration: precision 0.667, recall 0.222 (lowest-recall mode). 

• FM-5 (Operationalization Flattening): with GCF det = ˆnG/n G and SeqScore = count (seq. conn. )/(nG−1) , fires when GCF det < 0.70 OR SeqScore < 0.40 , OR when the response is cross-school-conflated — sim (R, GT Icorrect ) < 0.65 AND sim (R, GT Isurface-similar ) > 0.72 

(surface-similar investors from PKB school clustering, e.g. {Buffett, Graham, Klarman} deep-value; {Dalio, Soros} macro). Sequential connectors = {“first”, “then”, “next”, “Gate [1-9]”, “Step [1-9]”, “followed by”, “subsequently”, “if X then Y”}. Calibration: precision 0.824, recall 0.400. 

• FM-6 (Anachronistic Application): fires when yframework − yscenario > 10 years AND layer ∈ {L6, L7, L8}. Calibration: precision 0.750, recall 0.462. 

7.12 G-Eval Rubric Scoring for Open-Ended Layers (L6, L8) 

For layers where OGRS/KCCS do not apply, we adopt G-Eval [Liu et al., 2023] probability-weighted rubric scoring: for each rubric dimension di, sample n = 20 judge scores at T = 0 .7 and compute sdi = ∑ 

> s∈{ 0,0.5,1}

s·

ˆP (s|R, ρ di ), then aggregate GEval (R) = ∑ 

> i

wisdi . L8 dimensions/weights : framework identification (0.30), framework application (0.45), investment-action implications (0.25). L6 dimensions/weights : contradiction identification (0.40), temporal accuracy (0.30), explanatory depth (0.30). 

7.13 Composite Scoring by Layer 

Layer-adaptive composites (weight justification and BASP-average semantics in §11.9): - L4: 0.40 · OGRS k +0.35 · KCCS + 0 .25 · SAP@2 - L5: 0.50 · IVP micro + 0 .30 · KCCS + 0 .20 · SAP@2 - L6: 0.60 · GEval L6 + 0 .40 ·

ContradictionCoverage - L7: 0.35 · OGRS k + 0 .30 · KCCS + 0 .20 · VerdictAcc + 0 .15 · SAP@1 (VerdictAcc = binary accuracy of the final INVEST/DECLINE verdict; INCONCLUSIVE scored per §7.3) - L8: 

0.65 · GEval L8 + 0 .35 · IVP micro - L1–L3: 0.60 · FactAcc + 0 .40 · SAP@k (k = 1 , 2, 3 for L1, L2, L3), where FactAcc ∈ [0,1] is the judge-scored factual correctness of the response against the question’s ground-truth answer fields under the three-tier rubric (full/partial/no credit) For institutional (SWF) questions, CKCA is reported as an additive diagnostic alongside the layer composite but does not alter the composite formula. 

7.14 Sequence Alignment Metrics (retained from v0.1) 

The core sequence-alignment metrics are retained for backward compatibility and as interpretable complements to OGRS/KCCS: 

τ = C − D

(n

> 2

) , NED = EditDistance (S, ˆS)max( |S|, | ˆS|) , NLCS = |LCS (S, ˆS)|

max( |S|, | ˆS|)

OGRS subsumes Acc and τ into a unified coverage-weighted score; τ , NED, and NLCS are reported separately for comparability with prior work. The INCONCLUSIVE scoring rule specified in §7.3 above is an addendum to the OGRS VerdictAcc sub-metric. 33 7.15 BASP-strict and Gate Reconstruction Accuracy (GRA) BASP-strict (conjunction variant; see §8.7, §11.12). Because frontier models tend to score near ceiling on BASP-composite under Condition A (sanity wave: Claude Sonnet 4.6 achieves L5=0.967, L6=0.961), we also report BASP-strict: a scoring variant that awards full credit only when all five sub-metrics individually exceed per-metric thresholds (OGRS ≥ 0.70, KCCS ≥ 0.60, SAP@k/IVP/CKCA ≥ 0.50). Four failure modes trigger automatic gate failures regardless of the judge’s numeric score: FM-1 (Hallucinated Gate) → OGRS gate, FM-3 (Kill Criterion Omission) → KCCS gate, FM-4 (Voice Diffusion) → IVP gate, FM-6 (Anachronistic Application) → CKCA gate. When k of the 5 metric gates pass, BASP-strict $= $ BASP-composite ×(k/ 5) .BASP-strict is computed inline during run_phase4_evaluate.py with no additional API calls. Sanity-wave 4-model overall conjunction rates: Claude Sonnet 4.6 77.1%, GPT-5.5 65.4%, Gemini Flash Lite 8.5%, Gemini 3.5 Flash 4.3%. The frontier gap (Claude vs. Gemini Flash Lite) widens from 0.296 in BASP-composite (0.906 vs. 0.610) to 0.686 in conjunction rate (77.1% vs. 8.5%), demonstrating substantially improved discriminability. L5 conjunction rates: Claude 91.7%, GPT-5.5 83.3%, Gemini Flash Lite 4.2%, Gemini 3.5 Flash 4.2%. 

Gate Reconstruction Accuracy (GRA; results in §8.7). For questions that carry a gold_program ,we run a per-gate judge evaluation asking for each scored gate: (a) whether the gate concept was named or paraphrased (name_match 0/1), (b) whether the gate’s verdict is correctly classified into the rejection class (FILTER / KILL / FAIL ≡ §7.3 REJECT) versus the qualifying class (PASS / RANK ≡ §7.3 PROCEED) — a binary 0/1 verdict_match; INCONCLUSIVE is not a distinct GRA verdict class, so the §7.3 INCONCLUSIVE partial-credit rule does not apply to GRA verdict_match, and (c) what fraction of required_elements were cited (elements_match 0.0–1.0). Gate score = 0 if name_match=0, else (name_match + verdict_match + elements_match)/3. GRA = mean gate score across all scored gold-program gates. When GRA is available, it becomes a sixth gate in BASP-strict: GRA ≥ 0.70 passes. GRA is computed inline by run_ phase4_evaluate.py for new runs and retroactively via scripts/run_gra_eval.py for existing eval files. 

Sanity-wave 4-model GRA results (Condition A, 188Q dev set): L4 GRA means — Claude Sonnet 4.6: 0.770 (59.3% pass, n=27), GPT-5.5: 0.774 (61.5% pass, n=26), Gemini Flash Lite: 0.768 (63.0% pass, n=27), Gemini 3.5 Flash: 0.501 (29.6% pass, n=27). L7 GRA means — Claude: 0.574 (33.3% pass, n=12), GPT-5.5: 0.597 (41.7% pass, n=12), Gemini Flash Lite: 0.620 (33.3% pass, n=12), Gemini 3.5 Flash: 0.405 (16.7% pass, n=12). The three stronger respondents (Claude, GPT-5.5, Gemini Flash Lite) converge tightly at L4 GRA (0.768–0.774, within 0.6 pp). In this W1 slice, the models perform closely on L4 gate-name recall, so the metric is exposing a shared residual procedural weakness rather than separating those three by provider tier. Gemini 3.5 Flash’s L4 GRA of 0.501 reveals a fundamentally different failure mode — gate names missed entirely — not merely precision dropoff on required elements. 

# 8. Quantitative Evaluation 

Read this section as a preliminary, single-condition sanity wave that motivates the metric design — not as the benchmark’s model leaderboard. It uses a mixed judge (a known confound, §8.7), runs only Condition A, and predates the 8 L4H questions; the canonical 197-question dev split and the de-confounded unified-judge multi-model leaderboard are v1.0 deliverables (§11.1). The durable empirical claim here is methodological: composite scoring saturates at the frontier while GRA still exposes the procedural gap (§8.7). 

All results in §8.1–§8.7 are from the W1 sanity wave — four current models (Claude Sonnet 4.6, GPT-5.5, Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite, Gemini 3.5 Flash) evaluated on the 188-question dev split under Condition A (closed-book), cross-provider judging, and the full BASP / BASP-strict / GRA pipeline — computed directly from the released summary artifacts results/summary_v02_*.json . The benchmark follows a deliberate 

hardening loop : the W1 GRA failure analysis fed the authoring of the 8 expert-difficulty L4H questions (§5.4), which were merged into the dataset after this wave and are first evaluated in the v1.0 run — the same adversarial-iteration pattern used by dynamic benchmark efforts (§2.6). §8.1–§8.6 report the per-layer and per-metric breakdowns; §8.7 is the headline BASP-strict / GRA analysis. The only exceptions, explicitly labelled, are the three-condition pipeline-validation pilot (§8.3, Table 14: n=10, two cost-efficient models, corrected B/C machinery) and the cross-domain comparison points (§8.2). The earlier n=20 four-model pilot (GPT-4o / Claude 3.5 Sonnet / Gemini 1.5 Pro / Llama-3-70B) is superseded and retained only 34 Figure 6: Metric tightening exposes capability gap and gate-level reconstruction failure. Left: 4-model leaderboard across {Overall BASP-composite, L4 GRA mean, L7 GRA mean} — the BASP-composite frontier gap spans 29.6 pp while L4 GRA among the three stronger models (Claude / GPT-5.5 / cost-efficient Gemini Flash Lite) is flat within 0.6 pp (0.768–0.774); Gemini 3.5 Flash drops to L4 GRA 0.501. Right: Claude L4 BASP-strict conjunction drops 83.3% (5-gate) → 63.3% (6-gate, −20 pp) when GRA is added as the sixth gate. Composite saturates at the frontier; GRA tightens the metric but exposes a smaller true gap. in the archived v11 draft. Judge-pipeline note (v0.6). During v0.6 we identified and corrected two evaluation-harness defects that affect how these numbers should be read: (i) Conditions B/C were not previously model-in-the-loop (§8.3), and (ii) the §8.1–§8.7 W1 numbers were produced under a mixed judge assignment (different judges for different respondents; see §8.7), which confounds respondent capability with judge strictness. v0.6 introduces a single unified judge (gemini-3.1-pro ) with JSON-robustness hardening (§7.5); the de-confounded multi-model leaderboard under the unified judge is a v1.0 deliverable. The §8.1–§8.7 tables below are therefore retained as the mixed-judge W1 sanity wave and should be read with the §8.7/§11.2 judge caveats, not as a unified-judge result. 

Statistical framing : per-layer n ranges from 16 (L7) to 31 (L1); bootstrap 95% CI half-widths are reported per cell in the summary artifacts (overall ±0.027–0.034). The three-condition result (§8.3) is a small validation pilot (n=10, two models) and is read as directional, not a full-scale leaderboard. 

8.1 Declarative Competence and the Provider-Tier Split (L1–L3) Table 11: BASP-composite by Cognitive Layer — W1 Sanity Wave, Condition A Closed-book (mean BASP) 

35 Evaluation Layer  n Primary Capability Claude Sonnet 4.6  GPT-5.5 Gemini Flash Lite Gemini 3.5 Flash L1: Principle Identification  31  C1  0.906  0.921  0.596  0.573 L2: Source Attribution  23  C1+C2  0.725  0.815  0.458  0.431 L3: Operationalization  24  C1  0.916  0.867  0.638  0.381 L4: Framework Reconstruction  30  C5  0.932  0.906  0.677  0.421 L5: Cross-Investor Comparison  24  C4+C5  0.967  0.941  0.619  0.485 L6: Contradiction Recognition  23  C2  0.961  0.894  0.678  0.436 L7: Scenario Application  16  C3+C5  0.952  0.806  0.651  0.380 L8: Novel Extrapolation  17  C3+C4  0.892  0.621  0.537  0.301 

> Overall  188  — 0.906  0.861  0.610  0.438

36 Computed from the released per-model summary artifacts ( results/summary_v02_*.json ; W1, 188Q dev, Condition A, cross-provider judge). Values are mean BASP-composite; bootstrap 95% CI half-widths accompany each cell in the artifacts (overall: Claude ±0.027, GPT-5.5 ±0.034, Gemini Flash Lite ±0.029, Gemini 3.5 Flash ±0.032). These values are the single canonical cut used throughout §8 and §8.7 (Claude 0.906, GPT-5.5 0.861, Gemini Flash Lite 0.610, Gemini 3.5 Flash 0.438). The dominant pattern is a provider-tier split : the two frontier models exceed 0.86 at every layer except GPT-5.5’s L8 (0.621), while the cost-efficient Gemini models fall below 0.70 throughout and collapse at L8 (0.30–0.54). Within the weaker models the steepest drops fall on L8 (C3/C4) and L2 (C2) — consistent with XFinBench’s finding of largest gaps in temporal reasoning and scenario planning [Zhang et al., 2025]. 

Table 12: Source Attribution Precision (SAP@k) — W1 Sanity Wave, Condition A  

> Model

SAP@1 (Entity) † SAP@2 (Document) SAP@3 (Context) Claude Sonnet 4.6 0.888 0.915 0.973 GPT-5.5 0.809 0.920 0.947 Gemini Flash Lite 0.021 0.596 0.926 Gemini 3.5 Flash 0.021 0.415 0.856 

†SAP@1 values in this cut are not interpretable as a knowledge signal and are reported only for artifact transparency: the SAP@1 extractor applies a strict exact-token match that the @2/@3 judge-based levels do not, which inverts the idealized cascade ordering (§7.8) and produces the entity-level collapse visible for the cost-efficient models ( ≈0.02) — those models almost never emit the exact entity token the matcher requires yet recover at the looser document and context levels. Aligning extractor strictness across the three levels is a v1.0 fix; until then, SAP@2/SAP@3 are the operative attribution signals. Frontier models clear all three levels ( ≥0.81) regardless. 

8.2 The Declarative/Procedural Transition: No Composite Cliff at the Frontier 

Under the real W1 run (Table 11), BASP-composite does not drop from L3 to L4 for any model — the deltas are positive for all four: Claude +1.6pp (0.916 →0.932), GPT-5.5 +3.9pp (0.867 →0.906), Gemini Flash Lite +3.9pp (0.638 →0.677), Gemini 3.5 Flash +4.0pp (0.381 →0.421). The 16pp L3 →L4 cliff reported from the v0.1 pilot (GPT-4o / Claude 3.5 Sonnet / Gemini 1.5 Pro / Llama-3-70B) therefore does not replicate at the composite level for current models; it was a pilot-model and pilot-metric artifact. The procedural deficit re-appears only under the gate-level GRA metric (§8.7): the frontier models sit at L4 GRA 0.77 (0.768–0.774) and L7 GRA 0.57–0.62, well below their L4 composite of ~0.91–0.93. This composite-vs-GRA dissociation — not a composite cliff — is the operative procedural finding (§10.1). For cross-domain context, procedural-reasoning gaps reported elsewhere are MedQA ~20pp, LegalBench ~15pp, MMLU ~12pp, and FinQA’s ~30pp expert–model gap [Chen et al., 2021]; in InvestPhilBench that gap is carried by GRA rather than composite. 

Table 13: BASP Sub-metrics on Framework Reconstruction (L4) — W1 Sanity Wave, Condition A

37 Model  n (L4)  OGRS  KCCS  SAP@3  IVP  CKCA  BASP  FM-3 Rate Claude Sonnet 4.6 30  0.923  0.900  0.947  0.970  0.980  0.933  9.6% GPT-5.5  30  0.893  0.827  0.957  0.957  1.000  0.906  26.1% Gemini Flash Lite 30  0.716  0.627  0.621  0.701  0.747  0.677  60.6% Gemini 3.5 Flash 30  0.388  0.265  0.499  0.446  0.750  0.421  84.6% 

38 From results/summary_v02_*.json (table7_l4_basp , n=30 L4 questions, Condition A). FM-3 Rate = fraction of all-layer responses flagged by the FMDP FM-3 (Kill Criterion Omission) detector — an overall-model rate shown here for cross-reference with Table 16, not an L4-specific rate. The frontier–cost-efficient gap is widest on KCCS (0.90/0.83 vs. 0.63/0.27): the cost-efficient models lose kill-criterion coverage fastest, and their FM-3 rate rises to 60–85% — a procedural failure invisible in CKCA, which the cost-efficient models still pass (0.75) by identifying that some* kill occurs without identifying which . Per-gate GRA (§8.7) and Kendall τ gate-ordering will accompany the v1.0 multi-model results.* 

8.3 Three-Condition Evaluation: Pipeline-Validation Pilot (corrected B/C) 

Earlier drafts reported the three-condition decomposition only as an n=3 illustrative sketch on superseded pilot models, because Conditions B and C were not yet implemented as true model-in-the-loop settings: the harness scored retrieved/oracle card text directly rather than prompting the respondent with that card as context. v0.6 corrects this (§7.2, §7.5): Condition B now prompts the model with the top-3 PKB principle cards retrieved by embedding similarity ( text-embedding-3-large ), and Condition C injects the 

authoritative source the ground truth is keyed to — the gold-program framework card for framework questions, and the explicitly referenced principle cards otherwise. We validate the corrected pipeline on a layer-stratified 

10-question subset ( questions_v04_devpilot.json ; all eight layers, nine investors, four L4/L7 framework items) under all three conditions with two cost-efficient respondents and the single unified judge (§7.1), with the JSON-robustness hardening of §7.5 (zero judge-parse failures across all 60 judgments). 

Table 14: BASP-composite by Evaluation Condition — corrected-pipeline validation pilot (n=10; L4/L7 subset n=4) 

39 Model  Subset  A (Closed) B(PKB-RAG)  C (Oracle)  Knowledge gap (C −A)  RAG −Oracle (B −C)  Application gap (1 −C) Model P (cost-efficient) all 10Q  0.654  0.814  0.727  +0.073  +0.087  0.273 Model Q (cost-efficient) all 10Q  0.693  0.842  0.719  +0.026  +0.123  0.281 Model P (cost-efficient) L4/L7  0.585  0.889  0.784  +0.199  +0.105  0.216 Model Q (cost-efficient) L4/L7  0.770  0.840  0.805  +0.035  +0.035  0.195 

40 Models P and Q are two cost-efficient OpenRouter-hosted models used only for this internal pipeline-validation pilot; they are deliberately left unnamed here because the point is the corrected harness, not these models, and they are not part of the headline evaluation roster (Table 10). The full three-condition run names its models. Two findings, both robust across the two models. (i) The knowledge gap is positive (C − A = +0.03 to +0.20): supplying the investor’s documented framework/principles raises scores over closed-book, con-firming that missing procedural knowledge — not raw reasoning capacity — is a real bottleneck, paralleling FinanceBench’s oracle-condition result [Islam et al., 2023]. (ii) Targeted retrieval beats the oracle dump (B > C, by +0.04 to +0.12): the top-3 embedding-retrieved principle cards outperform injecting the complete framework card. This is the opposite of the textbook C ≥ B ordering and is an honest, mechanisti-cally expected result — full-card injection induces over-anchoring and long-context distraction (§2.2), worst on contradiction/scenario questions where the model rigidly applies the supplied gate structure instead of answering the question (e.g. a Klarman L7 contradiction item: closed-book 0.82 → oracle 0.49). The residual application gap (1 − C = 0.20–0.28) confirms that even with the correct source in context, models do not fully apply it. Scope caveat: this is a pipeline-validation pilot (n=10, two cost-efficient models) establishing that the corrected three-condition machinery behaves sensibly; the full multi-model three-condition run on the 197-question dev split is a v1.0 deliverable, and the B > C ordering is stated as a pilot observation, not a tuned target. 

8.4 FMDP Failure Mode Rates 

The six failure modes and their detection performance are taken from the FMDP calibration artifact 

results/table9_fmdp_v02.json (n=200 re-annotated responses; see §11.3). Prevalence is the fraction of the calibration set exhibiting each mode; precision/recall/F1 measure the FMDP detector against the human-adjudicated calibration labels. 

Table 15: FMDP Failure Modes — Prevalence and Detector Performance (n=200 calibration set)  

> Failure Mode

Prevalence Precision Recall F1 FM-1: Hallucinated Gate 15.5% 0.762 0.516 0.615 FM-2: Temporal Conflation 11.0% 0.786 0.500 0.611 FM-3: Kill Criterion Omission 42.5% 0.765 0.459 0.574 FM-4: Voice Diffusion 13.5% 0.667 0.222 0.333 FM-5: Operationalization Flattening 35.0% 0.824 0.400 0.538 FM-6: Anachronistic Application 6.5% 0.750 0.462 0.571 

Kill Criterion Omission (FM-3, 42.5%) and Operationalization Flattening (FM-5, 35.0%) are the most prevalent failure modes — both procedural, both concentrated at L4/L7. Voice Diffusion (FM-4) has the lowest detector recall (0.222) and the highest false-negative risk on the n=200 automated set. Under the n=100 expert calibration (§11.3) the largest divergences are instead over-flagging modes — FM-1, FM-3, and FM-5 fire more often than the expert — so the FMDP behaves as a sensitive screen pending precision-oriented recalibration. 

Table 16: Per-Model FMDP Flag Rates — W1 Sanity Wave, Condition A (fraction of responses flagged) 

> Failure Mode

Claude Sonnet 4.6 GPT-5.5 Gemini Flash Lite Gemini 3.5 Flash FM-1: Hallucinated Gate 0.037 0.032 0.314 0.122 FM-2: Temporal Conflation 0.011 0.027 0.160 0.069 FM-3: Kill Criterion Omission 0.096 0.261 0.606 0.846 FM-4: Voice Diffusion 0.005 0.021 0.351 0.154 41 Failure Mode 

Claude Sonnet 4.6 GPT-5.5 Gemini Flash Lite Gemini 3.5 Flash FM-5: Operationalization Flattening 0.032 0.101 0.878 0.963 FM-6: Anachronistic Application 0.000 0.021 0.021 0.000 

From results/summary_v02_*.json (table9_fmdp_rates , 188Q, Condition A). The per-model failure profile tracks the provider tier sharply: the two frontier models stay below 0.27 on every mode, while the cost-efficient Gemini models are dominated by the two procedural modes — Operationalization Flattening (0.88 / 0.96) and Kill Criterion Omission (0.61 / 0.85). Gemini 3.5 Flash flattens the operationalization in 96% of responses and omits the kill criterion in 85%, confirming that its low BASP-composite (0.438) is driven by procedural collapse rather than declarative gaps. 

8.5 Cross-Investor Differentiation: Per-Investor Voice Precision (IVP) Table 17: Per-Investor IVP (macro) by Model — W1 Sanity Wave, Condition A 

> Investor

Claude Sonnet 4.6 GPT-5.5 Gemini Flash Lite Gemini 3.5 Flash Warren Buffett 0.907 0.974 0.574 0.486 Charlie Munger 0.953 0.879 0.673 0.436 Benjamin Graham 0.944 0.939 0.785 0.598 Ray Dalio 0.989 0.972 0.773 0.577 Howard Marks 0.890 0.885 0.549 0.378 George Soros 0.967 0.900 0.645 0.375 Seth Klarman 0.975 0.830 0.640 0.462 Peter Lynch 0.965 0.935 0.767 0.620 Joel Greenblatt 0.975 0.935 0.545 0.376 

From results/summary_v02_*.json (table10_investor_ivp , Condition A). IVP ≥ 0.70 indicates well-preserved investor voice; < 0.50 indicates likely FM-4 (Voice Diffusion). The two frontier models maintain distinct voice for every investor ( ≥0.83), while the cost-efficient models diffuse voice for the lexically-overlapping value investors — Marks, Soros, Greenblatt, Buffett fall to 0.55–0.65 (Gemini Flash Lite) and 0.38–0.49 (Gemini 3.5 Flash). Pairwise SDI contrasts await the v1.0 multi-model run; a measured human IVP baseline (experts authoring answers, scored on IVP) awaits the separate human-performance study (v1.0). The §11.3 gold set establishes that automated IVP tracks expert rating* judgment well (r = 0.80, the strongest BASP sub-metric).* 

8.6 L7/L8 Logical Depth and Long-Context Vulnerability 

L7 (Scenario Application) and L8 (Novel Extrapolation) remain the hardest layers in the W1 run (Table 11). L8 BASP spans the widest provider-tier gap of any layer — 0.892 (Claude) down to 0.301 (Gemini 3.5 Flash), a 0.59 spread. GPT-5.5’s L8 (0.621) is its single weakest layer, a 24pp drop from its L7 (0.806): novel extrapolation strains even a frontier model. Critically, per-gate GRA at L7 sits at 0.57–0.62 for the frontier models (§8.7) — far below their L7 composite of 0.81–0.95 — confirming that scenario application fails to reconstruct gate-level decision logic even where composite scoring stays elevated, consistent with the long-context + sequential-depth vulnerabilities of §3 and with XFinBench’s finding that scenario planning is the worst-performing capability in graduate-level financial reasoning [Zhang et al., ACL 2025]. 

8.7 Primary Evaluation — Frontier-Model Sanity Wave (v0.6) 

The W1 sanity wave is the paper’s primary empirical evaluation, and the source of every table in §8.1–§8.6. Four current models are scored under Condition A (closed-book) with cross-provider judging (§11.2) on 42 the 188-question dev split ( questions_v03_dev.json ; the 8 subsequently-authored L4H questions enter the evaluation in v1.0 — see §8 preamble and §11.1). Beyond the per-layer composites of §8.1, this section adds BASP-strict and Gate Reconstruction Accuracy (GRA). The headline reading is the composite-vs-GRA divergence below; the ceiling/discriminability concern it raises is treated as a limitation in §11.12. 

Sanity-wave 4-model results (Condition A, 188Q dev set): 

43 Model  BASP  L4 BASP  L5 BASP  L7 BASP  L8 BASP  Overall conj  L4 conj  L5 conj  L7 conj Claude Sonnet 4.6 

> 0.906  0.932  0.967  0.952  0.892  77.1%  63.3%  91.7%  43.8% GPT-5.5  0.861  0.906  0.941  0.806  0.621  65.4%  43.3%  83.3%  50.0% Gemini Flash Lite 0.610  0.677  0.619  0.651  0.537  8.5%  16.7%  4.2%  0.0% Gemini 3.5 Flash 0.438  0.421  0.485  0.380  0.301  4.3%  0.0%  4.2%  0.0%

44 Judge note (important caveat): this W1 cut used a mixed judge assignment — Claude and GPT-5.5 were judged by the Gemini Flash Lite judge, while the two Gemini respondents were judged by a Claude judge. Cross-provider judging avoids self-judging, but using different* judges for different respondents confounds respondent capability with judge strictness : the Claude judge applies stricter rubrics on average, so part of the apparently large Gemini 3.5 Flash deficit (0.438) is a judge-strictness artifact rather than pure capability. The cross-tier composite gaps in this table should therefore be read as upper bounds , not clean capability differences. v0.6 addresses this directly by moving to a single unified judge (gemini-3.1-pro ) applied to all respondents, with JSON-robustness hardening (§7.5) that eliminated the judge-parse truncations present in this cut; the de-confounded unified-judge leaderboard over the full model roster is a v1.0 deliverable, and a 50-item three-judge agreement sub-study (§11.2, Table 18) will bound residual judge bias. Values here are aggregated from results/eval_v02_*.json and match Tables 11–17.* Note that frontier models sustain high L4 BASP-composite (Claude 0.932, GPT-5.5 0.906) and show no L3 →L4 composite cliff (§8.2) — the composite does not expose a procedural deficit at the frontier. That deficit re-emerges only under the gate-level GRA metric below. 

GRA results (6-gate extension, all 4 sanity-wave models):  

> Model

L4 GRA mean L4 GRA pass (≥0.70) L7 GRA mean L7 GRA pass (≥0.70) Claude Sonnet 4.6 0.770 59.3% (n=27) 0.574 33.3% (n=12) GPT-5.5 0.774 61.5% (n=26) 0.597 41.7% (n=12) Gemini Flash Lite 0.768 63.0% (n=27) 0.620 33.3% (n=12) Gemini 3.5 Flash 0.501 29.6% (n=27) 0.405 16.7% (n=12) Claude, GPT-5.5, and Gemini Flash Lite converge tightly at L4 GRA (0.768–0.774, within 0.6 pp). In this W1 slice, GRA does not rank these three models by provider tier; it shows that all three still lose substantial credit after gate names are recognized. The operative failure is verdict_match and elements_match precision — models correctly name gates but misclassify normalized PROCEED / REJECT / INCONCLUSIVE verdict types and partially omit required_elements. Gemini 3.5 Flash’s L4 GRA of 0.501 represents a qualitatively different failure: gate names are missed entirely at significant rates. L7 GRA means (0.574–0.620 for frontier models) are consistently below the 0.70 pass threshold, revealing that scenario application questions systematically fail to reconstruct gate-level decision logic even when BASP-composite remains elevated — a ceiling/depth dissociation that motivates the 8 expert-difficulty L4 hard questions described in §5.4. BASP-strict thresholds are calibrated by theoretical reasoning in v0.6; the human gold set (§11.3) confirms the composite tracks expert judgment (r = 0.72), and precision-oriented recalibration of the BASP-strict / FMDP operating points against the expert labels is a v1.0 item. 

Diagnostic implication — composite vs. GRA on what the gap actually measures. The juxtapo-sition of the BASP-composite leaderboard with the L4 GRA leaderboard is the most informative reading of the sanity wave. Across the three stronger respondents (Claude Sonnet 4.6, GPT-5.5, and — notably — the cost-efficient Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite), BASP-composite spans 29.6 pp (0.906 ↔ 0.610) while L4 GRA is flat within 0.6 pp (0.768–0.774). That Flash Lite matches the two frontier models on L4 GRA despite trailing them by ~25–30 pp on the composite means GRA does not discriminate by provider tier at L4 the way the composite does — the two metrics are measuring different things. This is more than a ceiling artefact — it is direct evidence that the composite ranking at the frontier is not being driven by gate reconstruction. With gate-name recall pinned within noise, the composite ordering must be driven by some combination of the other four BASP sub-metrics: OGRS coverage, KCCS kill-criterion identification, SAP@k attribution depth, IVP investor-voice precision, and CKCA compound-kill-criterion accuracy — together with the FMDP-driven gate failures that flip OGRS / KCCS / IVP / CKCA pass/fail status. In other words, on the population of questions that this sanity wave currently exercises, the composite is a prose-quality 

aggregate and only marginally a procedural-reconstruction signal ; GRA is the procedural signal in isolation, and it both compresses the frontier gap and amplifies the bottom-end gap (Gemini 3.5 Flash drops to L4 GRA 0.501, a qualitatively different failure). Two consequences follow. (i) Any claim that “model 45 X procedurally reasons better than model Y at L4” at the frontier should cite GRA, not BASP-composite. (ii) The composite-vs-GRA divergence motivates a v1.0 analysis that decomposes BASP-composite into a 

procedural component (GRA-correlated terms — KCCS kill-criterion identification, OGRS gate sequencing) and a non-procedural component (IVP voice, SAP source attribution) to verify which sub-metric actually drives the 30-pp BASP-composite ordering at the frontier. Figure 6 visualises this contrast. 

# 9. Failure Mode Taxonomy 

Note on FM quantification : prevalence and detection performance are computed by FMDP against the n=200 calibration set (Table 15). Operationalization Flattening (FM-5) has the highest detector precision (0.824); Voice Diffusion (FM-4) the lowest (0.667) and lowest recall (0.222), reflecting the difficulty of semantic voice-distance thresholding. The two most prevalent modes — Kill Criterion Omission (FM-3, 42.5%) and Operationalization Flattening (FM-5, 35.0%) — are both procedural and concentrated at L4/L7. 

FM-1: Hallucinated Gate (15.5%, FMDP precision 0.762) : The model asserts a decision gate absent from the investor’s documented framework — most often by inventing intermediate gates to “fill in” sparse or non-sequential gate numbering (e.g., a framework whose real gates are [1,2,3,5] or [3,6]). FMDP uses the complete framework card, not merely a partial gold-program subset, as the absence test when the item targets selected gates (§7.11). Thus enumerating a real but unscored gate is not hallucination; inventing a non-existent gate is. This is the gate-level dual of source hallucination — a confident, plausible, but unsupported structural claim. 

FM-2: Temporal Conflation (11.0%, FMDP precision 0.786) : Positions or sources from different points in an investor’s career are merged or mis-dated, erasing documented temporal evolution. FMDP: |year_response − year_ground_truth| > 2 with high confidence, or failure to date-separate documented position shifts. The systematic 1986 →1990 owner-earnings year error replicates the confident-hallucination pattern documented in FinanceBench [Islam et al., 2023] and TruthfulQA [Lin et al., 2022]. YouTube-sourced evidence (Tier 4, Table 7) is critical here: temporally distinct positions often surface in spoken 

interviews on different dates rather than in a single letter. Two cases are empirically grounded in the released corpus: 

(i) Buffett — airlines (documented reversal across three temporal phases): The evolution is documented across three source tiers. Phase 1 (anti-airline): In a 2001 speech at Terry College of Business (YT: 2a9Lx9J8uSs ), Buffett states: “the airline business from that point forward . . . it’s nothing but cost investors money . . . I went in the US Air, I bought a preferred stock in 1989 . . . as soon as my check cleared the company went into the red . . . I’ve got an 800 number I call now whenever I think about buying an airline stock.” Phase 2 (massive airline investment): The Berkshire Hathaway Annual Letters for 2016–2019 (Tier 1, berkshirehathaway.com/letters/ ) list Delta Air Lines (9.6% ownership, $3.3B), Southwest Airlines (8.7%, $2.2B), and United Continental (8.1%, $1.8B) among the top 15 equity holdings — ~$7.7B in aggregate airline exposure (2018 letter). Phase 3 (pandemic exit): A 2021 video (YT: uh5MgS9_ roA ) documents the 2020 sell: “he sold his stakes in a few of the major airline companies, noting that ‘the world has changed for airlines’ due to the coronavirus.” A model that presents any single phase as Buffett’s timeless airline view, or merges the phases, commits FM-2 — the canonical Temporal Conflation test case. (PKB canonical ID: buffett_circle_of_competence_001 and buffett_moat_001 jointly; see Appendix F.) (ii) Dalio — cash and defensive positioning (intra-Bridgewater temporal shift): The Dalio institutional-period transcript corpus (~70K spoken words across 15 transcripts, 2013–2022) contains the 2013 “Economic Machine” explanation (YT: PHe0bXAIuk0 ) treating cash as a transactional settlement medium, alongside later-cycle Bridgewater-era interviews (2020–2022) discussing gold, inflation hedging, and defensive portfolio construction — motivating date-tagged coverage rather than a single “timeless” quote. Post-Bridgewater material (Dalio’s October 2022 departure and subsequent independent-investor commentary) is explicitly filtered from the QA generation pipeline via data/curation/investor_career_boundaries_ v01.json to prevent FM-6-class anachronistic attribution. (PKB canonical IDs: dalio_economic_machine_ 001 and dalio_regime_positioning_001 ; see Appendix F.) 

46 FM-3: Kill Criterion Omission (42.5%, FMDP precision 0.765) : The model reconstructs gate names but omits the kill criteria that make each gate decisive, reducing a sequential decision tree to a flat checklist. FMDP: kill-criterion coverage rate (KCR_det) < 0.50 (§7.11). This is the most prevalent failure mode. For institutional frameworks, the subtype is kill-criterion abstraction — models characterize NBIM’s absolute ESG exclusion as a “preference” rather than a mandatory elimination trigger, and misidentify CPPIB’s factor-substitutability kill as a “quality check” rather than a capital-redirection decision rule. The pharmaceutical Circle-of-Competence example of §1 (a model proceeding past a triggered kill gate) is a canonical FM-3 case. 

FM-4: Voice Diffusion (13.5%, FMDP precision 0.667) : Analytical personas blended or inverted. FMDP: IVP < 0.50 or pairwise SDI < 0.35. The canonical FM-4 case is the Marks pendulum vs. Buffett contrarian conflation. Marks’s corpus (Oaktree memos; Table 8 catalogs his distinctive “pendulum” / “risk control” / “market cycle temperature” phrasing) explicitly describes a pendulum requiring active cycle-temperature monitoring — e.g., “The pendulum has swung in the other direction, and risk aversion takes over from risk tolerance” (memo “Cockroaches in the Coal Mine,” 2025). Buffett’s 2006 Annual Letter states: “Be fearful when others are greedy, and be greedy when others are fearful” — a reactive valuation signal, not a monitoring framework. The distinctive-phrase divergence (Table 8: Marks’s “pendulum” / “risk control” language vs. Buffett’s “owner earnings” / “circle of competence” language) illustrates the lexical signature difference that SDI is designed to capture. The L8 persona-inversion subtype — argmax of cosine similarity to ground truth points to the wrong investor — is the most dangerous for deployment: the model is confidently wrong about which framework it is applying. 

FM-5: Operationalization Flattening (35.0%, FMDP precision 0.824) : Distinct operationalizations of a shared concept are collapsed into a single generic version. The canonical case: answering a Graham L3 margin-of-safety question with Buffett’s owner-earnings intrinsic-value calculation — both invoke “margin of safety,” both are individually defensible, but neither preserves the cited investor’s documented operationalization (Graham’s two-thirds-of-NAV net-net screen vs. Buffett’s owner-earnings discount). FMDP: GCF_det < 0.70 OR sequential-connector score < 0.40, or operationalization-element coverage below threshold (§7.11). This is the second most prevalent mode (35.0%). 

FM-6: Anachronistic Application (6.5%, FMDP precision 0.750) : Framework vintage mismatched to scenario era. FMDP: framework_era − scenario_era > 10 years. 

# 10. Discussion 

10.1 The Declarative-Procedural Gap: Comparing Across Benchmarks 

The L1–L3 ceiling (65–87%) and L4–L8 collapse (28–67%) confirm Anderson’s [1983] framework for investment philosophy. Placing this alongside related benchmarks creates a coherent picture of where financial LLM capability currently stands: 

• FinQA [Chen et al., 2021]: ~30pp expert–model gap (91.2% vs. 61.2%) on multi-step numerical reasoning 

• XFinBench [Zhang et al., 2025]: ~12.5pp expert–model gap (80% vs. 67.3% for o1) on graduate-level reasoning 

• InvestPhilBench L4–L8 : ~30–50pp gap vs. estimated human expert performance on procedural philosophy tasks The progressive gap — smaller for quantitative tasks (XFinBench’s ~12.5pp), larger for qualitative expert knowledge (FinQA’s ~30pp on reasoning programs, InvestPhilBench’s ~30–50pp) — suggests that LLMs’ encoding of domain expert procedures from narrative prose is systematically weaker than encoding of computational procedures or factual recall. The capability-level analysis (Table 11) refines this further: C5 (procedural sequencing) and C3 (scenario extrapolation) show the steepest decline across all models, consistent with XFinBench’s finding that temporal reasoning and scenario planning are the worst-performing capabilities [Zhang et al., 2025]. 47 Reconciling the pilot cliff with frontier saturation. The 16pp L3 →L4 BASP-composite cliff (§8.2) is a 

v0.1-pilot, weaker-model phenomenon (GPT-4o / Claude 3.5 Sonnet / Gemini 1.5 Pro / Llama-3-70B). Under the primary v0.6 sanity wave (§8.7), current frontier models do not show this cliff in BASP-composite — Claude Sonnet 4.6 scores L4=0.932 — because the composite is dominated by prose-quality sub-metrics that frontier models satisfy easily. The procedural gap has not closed; it has migrated to a finer-grained metric .GRA, which isolates per-gate reconstruction (name + verdict-type + required-elements), still places L4 at ~0.77 (0.768–0.774) and L7 at 0.57–0.62 for the same frontier models — i.e., the cliff re-emerges precisely where the metric stops rewarding fluent prose and starts requiring correct gate logic. The correct v1.0 framing is therefore not “frontier models fail L4” but “the procedural deficit is invisible to composite scoring and visible to GRA,” which is the central methodological lesson of the BASP/GRA contrast (§8.7, §11.12). This is why GRA, not BASP-composite, is the metric of record for frontier procedural-reasoning claims. 

10.2 Knowledge Gap vs. Application Gap: FinanceBench Parallel 

The three-condition validation pilot (Table 14) connects to FinanceBench’s oracle-condition finding [Islam et al., 2023], with an instructive twist. FinanceBench found that providing the exact gold evidence page outperforms all retrieval configurations — retrieval is the bottleneck for document QA. InvestPhilBench’s pilot likewise shows a positive knowledge gap (Oracle − Closed-book = +0.03 to +0.20 BASP): supplying the documented source raises scores, so missing procedural knowledge is a real bottleneck. The twist is that 

targeted retrieval beats the oracle dump (PKB-RAG > full-framework Oracle by +0.04 to +0.12): unlike a single SEC evidence page, a complete framework card is a large, rigidly-structured object that induces over-anchoring and long-context distraction (§2.2), so injecting it wholesale can underperform afocused top-3 principle retrieval — most visibly on contradiction/scenario questions. Two implications follow: (i) the non-trivial application gap (1 − Oracle = 0.20–0.28 BASP) persists even with the correct source in context, a residual reasoning gap that retrieval alone cannot close (it requires Framework-Aware prompting or fine-tuning); and (ii) for deployment, targeted PKB retrieval is the better RAG design than dumping the full framework. These are pilot-scale observations (n=10, two models; §8.3) to be confirmed in the v1.0 multi-model run. 

10.3 Temporal Conflation and Source Confabulation as a Distinct Risk Category 

In the W1 run (Table 12) the cost-efficient models exhibit an entity-level attribution collapse (SAP@1 ≈

0.02) while recovering at the document and context levels — a different signature than the pilot-hypothesized monotonic cascade drop, but the same underlying risk FinanceBench identified: models confabulate specific provenance with high surface confidence [Islam et al., 2023]. RAG over a PKB-indexed corpus directly addresses this: SAP@2 accuracy >0.90 in Condition B (PKB-augmented) would indicate retrieval successfully grounds document attribution. (The SAP@1 exact-match rule should be relaxed before SAP@1 is read as a knowledge signal; see §8.1.) The SAP@k metric provides a direct retrieval-quality signal for PKB-augmented deployments. 

10.4 Why Dalio and Soros Frameworks Are Structurally Hardest to Reconstruct 

The framework-topology metadata now encoded in the data ( decision_frameworks_v05.json , Table 5; §11.10) gives a structural — not merely empirical — account of which frameworks are hardest to reconstruct. Dalio and Soros are the two investors whose canonical procedures are dominated by non-linear topologies :Dalio’s Debt Supercycle Navigation and Economic Machine Positioning frameworks are conditional_branch 

/ regime_dependent (the verdict at a gate depends on which macro regime is active), and his Bubble Detection Gauge is a weighted_threshold_4_of_7 ; Soros’s reflexive trade construction carries a re-entry property in which a confirmed hypothesis loops back to resize the position. Both depart from the linear_ sequential -conjunction form (15 of 25 cards) that a model can reconstruct by simply listing gates in order. The mechanistic prediction is that the difficulty of these frameworks is invisible to composite scoring but exposed by gate-level GRA . This is consistent with the W1 evidence: per-investor IVP (Table 17) shows frontier models preserve Dalio’s and Soros’s voice at near-ceiling (Claude 0.989 / 0.967), so they are not “hard” in the lexical-signature sense; the residual difficulty is procedural, surfacing where a model 48 must (a) classify the verdict type of a regime-dependent gate (FM-1/FM-5 territory) and (b) represent a non-total gate ordering whose Kendall-τ is only approximately defined. We therefore reframe the original pilot claim (“Dalio/Soros score lowest”) as a per-framework GRA hypothesis : conditional-branch and weighted-threshold frameworks should show the largest L4 →GRA and L7 →GRA drops. The chain — topology metadata (Table 5) → metric-validity caveat for non-total orders (§7.14) → predicted gate-reconstruction difficulty → FM-1/FM-5 on non-linear structures (§9) — is a falsifiable design hypothesis to be tested directly in the v1.0 multi-model run with per-framework GRA, not a settled W1 result. 

10.5 Institutional Framework Failures 

Institutional asset-owner frameworks expose a failure subtype distinct from individual-investor FM-3: kill-criterion abstraction . For NBIM, models tend to characterize the Council-on-Ethics ESG exclusion as “ESG-aware” or “sustainable” investing — accurate at the declarative level but missing the absolute, non-discretionary character of the exclusion trigger. For CPPIB, the factor-substitutability kill at Gate 2 is the most commonly dropped: models evaluate the active strategy on risk-adjusted return (correct for an individual-investor framework) but skip the factor-decomposition gate that would redirect a “good active strategy” to a cheaper passive factor implementation. These failures differ from individual-investor FM-3 in that the model does not merely omit a kill criterion but misclassifies its nature (discretionary vs. mandatory; absolute vs. threshold-relative). As flagged in §5.3, the three institutional frameworks are not yet encoded as machine-readable cards in decision_frameworks_v05.json ; the CKCA metric (§7.10) and this subtype are therefore defined against the prose specifications, and the analysis here is a design illustration to be quantified once NBIM/CPPIB/PIF are encoded as cards with paired QA items in v1.0. 

10.6 Implications for Financial AI Deployment 

The failure profile maps to concrete deployment guidance. For research augmentation : single-pass LLM framework analysis should be cross-checked against primary sources, because FM-3 (Kill Criterion Omission) means an LLM-generated “Buffett analysis” may silently drop the gate that would have terminated the thesis. For institutional deployment : evaluation protocols must probe procedural fidelity, not just factual recall — specifically whether mandatory exclusions (NBIM) and factor-substitutability screens (CPPIB) are modeled as hard kills rather than soft preferences. For model improvement , the three most prevalent modes have distinct interventions: RAG over the PKB addresses FM-2 (Temporal Conflation, the 1986 →1990-class year errors); Framework-Aware CoT that forces an explicit per-gate kill-criterion verdict addresses FM-3; and investor-specific tuning on primary-source text addresses FM-5 (Operationalization Flattening). Crucially, §8.7 shows the procedural deficit these interventions target is invisible in BASP-composite at the frontier 

and visible only under GRA — so any deployment gate built on composite scoring alone will systematically over-certify frontier models. 

10.7 Gold Program Annotation: Paralleling FinQA’s Dual-Accuracy Design 

InvestPhilBench’s GRP annotation (§6.3) enables the same dual-accuracy evaluation that FinQA identified as essential: execution accuracy (final INVEST/DECLINE verdict correct) and program accuracy (full gate sequence with correct verdicts and kill criterion identification). Paralleling FinQA’s finding that expert humans achieve 91.16% execution accuracy vs. 61.24% for best models, we expect InvestPhilBench’s v1.0 human expert evaluation to show a similar ~30pp execution gap and an even larger program accuracy gap, since investment philosophy frameworks are expressed as prose rather than explicit algorithmic steps. One caveat carries over from FinQA’s numeric setting to ours: gate-level program accuracy captures checklist 

fidelity but not the weighted, compensatory judgment practitioners apply when a strongly satisfied criterion offsets a weaker one — a limit of GRA discussed in §11.11. 

# 11. Limitations 

11.1 Dataset scale and conceptual curation. The v0.6 reviewer-resolved conceptual core contains 

118 investment principles , 25 decision frameworks (with explicit topology metadata), and 243 QA 

49 questions (197 dev / 46 test; seed 20260420) across 8 cognitive layers, including 8 expert-difficulty L4 hard questions (see §5.4) added in v0.6 to target discovered GRA failure patterns. The v0.5 cycle regenerated 6 Dalio QA items contaminated with post-Bridgewater research (see §11.6) and added 5 new Soros principles and 5 new Soros L3/L4/L7/L8 questions (see §11.5). The prior v0.4.1 manual dependency review archived two conceptually invalid questions and reduced qa_dependency_audit_v01.json to zero active affected items. Statistical power at layer level varies: in the W1 run (§8) per-layer n ranges 16–31, giving overall bootstrap 95% CI half-widths of ±0.027–0.034 (Table 11); single-layer cells for minority investors are wider. The three-condition decomposition (§8.3, Table 14) is now a corrected-pipeline validation pilot (n=10, two cost-efficient models) rather than the former n=3 legacy sketch; it establishes that the implemented B/C machinery behaves sensibly (positive knowledge gap; targeted RAG over full-card oracle) but is not a full-scale result, and the multi-model 197-question three-condition run remains a v1.0 deliverable. Evaluation/dataset versioning (hardening loop). The W1 sanity wave was run on the then-current 188-question dev split (questions_v03_dev.json ); its GRA failure analysis then fed the authoring of the 8 expert-difficulty L4H questions (§5.4), which were merged afterward to form the 197-question v0.6 dev split. Because these questions postdate W1, they carry no W1 scores and are first evaluated in the v1.0 multi-model run — evaluating them against the same wave whose failures they target would conflate adversarial item selection with model capability. Headline sanity-wave numbers therefore reflect the 188-question split on which they were produced; the test split is evaluated exactly once per model in W5. 

11.2 Judge design: self-judging, strictness confound, and JSON robustness. Judge design evolved across three stages, each fixing a defect in the prior. (1) The v0.1 pilot used Gemini 3.1 Flash Lite as both respondent and judge — self-judging circularity , where the judge may reward patterns it would itself produce. (2) The W1 sanity wave (§8) moved to cross-provider judging, but assigned different judges to different respondents (Claude/GPT judged by Gemini; Gemini judged by Claude). This removes self-judging but introduces a strictness confound : because judge models differ in average severity, cross-tier composite gaps in §8.1–§8.7 partly reflect judge identity, not respondent capability (§8.7). (3) v0.6 adopts a single unified judge (gemini-3.1-pro ) applied to all respondents via --judge-model , giving an apples-to-apples comparison; for the four-respondent set it self-judges no top model (it is not among them). A unified judge also surfaced a reliability issue — reasoning judges spend output tokens on internal reasoning, truncating the verdict JSON on long oracle/RAG responses (up to ~79% of rows fell back to neutral 0.5 placeholders before the fix). We hardened the judge call ( JUDGE_MAX_TOKENS , env-overridable, plus a single reinforced retry on parse failure), reducing judge-parse failures to zero across all judgments in the §8.3 validation pilot. The de-confounded unified-judge leaderboard over the full roster is a v1.0 deliverable; residual judge bias will be bounded by a 50-item three-judge agreement sub-study (planned Table 18). 

11.3 Automated vs. human gold standard. We report the first measured human-alignment estimate for BASP on a 100-item gold calibration set drawn from the W1 humangold split (layer-stratified; model identity blinded A/B; pairing one strong and one weak respondent so failure modes are not too sparse to estimate). Annotation provenance (disclosed). The canonical reference labels are the genuinely inde-pendent human pass in data/qa_benchmark/human_gold_build/human_gold_annotator_final.csv . The annotator scored each blinded (response, gold) pair under the released rubric ( data/qa_benchmark/human_ gold_build/ANNOTATION_GUIDE.md ), without access to model identity and under explicit instructions not to consult external sources or coordinate row-level judgments. No LLM-generated pre-annotations were used as the gold labels; LLM-rated sheets are retained only as disclosed comparison arms. During final review, two reference-gold issues were corrected (an L7 contradiction verdict and an L8 extrapolation rubric, propagated upstream to questions_v04 ). We therefore treat the calibration as an independent single-human gold pass, while still distinguishing it from a dual-human reliability study; accordingly we report no human–human inter-annotator agreement, and the fully independent two-human replication remains a v1.0 robustness deliverable. The annotation tooling is released ( scripts/build_human_gold_sheet.py , scripts/score_ human_gold_final.py ), and the per-record labels and agreement statistics are in results/human_gold_ calibration_v01.json .

BASP composite tracks the human gold; GRA is not yet separately human-validated. Against the expert reference, the automated BASP composite attains Pearson r = 0.72, Spearman ρ = 0.59, and mean absolute error 0.10 on the 0–1 scale, with near-identical central tendency (expert mean 0.836 vs. automated 50 0.850 — the pipeline is only ≈0.014 more lenient on average). Per sub-metric, agreement is highest for Investor Voice Precision (IVP, r = 0.80, MAE = 0.08) and OGRS (r = 0.74) and lowest for Source Attribution Precision (SAP@3: r = 0.30, MAE = 0.17) . The SAP weakness is consistent with the rubric’s own caveat that paraphrase-vs-verbatim attribution is the most judgment-dependent dimension, and we flag SAP@k as the least reliable BASP sub-metric pending a sharper attribution rubric. CKCA shows low correlation (r = 0.46) but the smallest error (MAE = 0.05): both rater and pipeline concentrate coherence near the ceiling, compressing the range and depressing correlation without disagreement on level. By cognitive layer, agreement is tightest at L6 (MAE 0.025) and L2 (0.044) and loosest at the two hardest layers, L7 (MAE 0.21) and L8 (0.15) , where the longer scenario/extrapolation answers leave the most room for graded disagreement — the same layers where GRA exposes the procedural deficit (§8.7). The current human-gold file validates OGRS/KCCS as components of BASP but does not yet contain a separate human per-gate GRA pass. Because GRA is the metric of record for the procedural-reconstruction claim, v1.0 will report per-gate human agreement directly: name_match, normalized verdict_match, required-elements F1, and aggregate GRA, with bootstrap CIs by layer and framework topology. Until that study is complete, GRA results should be read as a stricter automated diagnostic whose construct validity is supported by the GRP schema and adjacent BASP components, not as an independently human-validated score. 

Human ↔ automated agreement, 100-item expert gold set (Pearson r; MAE on 0–1):  

> BASP metric

r MAE Note 

Composite 0.72 0.10 expert mean 0.836 vs. automated 0.850 OGRS 0.74 0.10 graded task correctness KCCS 0.62 0.14 key-concept coverage SAP@3 0.30 0.17 weakest — attribution rubric ambiguity IVP 0.80 0.08 strongest — investor voice CKCA 0.46 0.05 low r but smallest error (ceiling-compressed) 

The FMDP is a sensitive screen, not yet a calibrated detector. Treating the expert flags as ground truth (n = 100; per-mode prevalences 0–8%, so estimates are noisy and should be read as directional), the automated FMDP is high-recall but low-precision — it systematically over-flags relative to the expert: FM-1 (auto 16% vs. expert 7%), FM-3 (20% vs. 8%), and FM-5 (9% vs. 0%). FM-3 Kill-Criterion Omission is the best-detected mode (recall 0.88, precision 0.35, F1 0.50, Cohen’s κ 0.44); FM-5 Operationalization Flattening fires entirely as false positives against this expert (who never flagged it on this set), and FM-6 Anachronistic Application never fires on either side. This supersedes the earlier statement that no human-alignment figure was claimed and refines the prior expectation that FM-4 would move most under human calibration: the modes that diverge most from expert judgment are the over-flagging ones (FM-1/FM-3/FM-5), and precision-oriented recalibration of the FMDP operating point against expert labels is a named v1.0 item. The manuscript’s failure-mode taxonomy and the separate n=200 automated calibration in Table 15 remain synchronized with results/table9_fmdp_v02.json : FM-1 Hallucinated Gate, FM-2 Temporal Conflation, FM-3 Kill Criterion Omission, FM-4 Voice Diffusion, FM-5 Operationalization Flattening, FM-6 Anachronistic Application. 

Disclosed LLM-rater cross-check. As a supplementary, fully-disclosed “LLM-as-annotator” arm, a separate Claude rater — a different model family from the Gemini judge that produces the automated BASP — scored the same 100 items under the same rubric ( data/qa_benchmark/human_gold_build/human_gold_ llm_rater_claude_v2.csv ). It correlates r = 0.79 ( ρ = 0.73, MAE = 0.10) with the expert gold but is systematically more lenient (mean 0.883 vs. 0.836, +0.05), illustrating that a single strong LLM is a scalable but optimistic proxy for expert judgment, not a substitute for it. 

11.4 Western-equity bias. All nine investors operate primarily in US public equity or credit markets. 51 The benchmark does not cover alternative-asset managers, sovereign wealth fund frameworks, fixed-income specialists, or non-English-language investment philosophy. Benchmark scores therefore measure LLM knowledge of a specific Anglo-American equity tradition, not investment reasoning capability in general. 

11.5 Corpus asymmetry and Soros reflexivity coverage. Buffett is the only investor whose corpus is written-dominant (~273K combined words; 64.1% written). Five investors are Tier-4 dominant (>80% spoken): Graham (97.2%), Greenblatt (95.9%), Klarman (94.8%), Lynch (90.9%), and Marks (82.6%). Graham’s scraped web corpus is particularly thin (~3.2K words) relative to Buffett (~175K); this asymmetry may inflate L2 source-attribution scores for Buffett and deflate them for Graham. Graham corpus backfill (targeting +20K words) is planned as B2 in the v1.0 timeline. Soros (v0.4.1 → v0.5) : prior to v0.5, Soros held only 6/113 PKB principles (5% of KB), with only 1/6 directly addressing reflexivity and zero coverage of currency speculation, macro thematic positioning, or two-way feedback mechanisms. The scraped Soros web corpus also showed a 847-word uniformity pattern consistent with extraction truncation. The v0.5 release adds 5 hand-authored Soros principles ( soros_currency_speculation_001 , soros_macro_thematic_positioning_001 ,

soros_two_way_feedback_loop_001 , soros_boom_bust_phases_detailed_001 , soros_asymmetric_bet_ sizing_001 ) anchored to The Alchemy of Finance (1987), Soros on Soros (1995), and The New Paradigm for Financial Markets (2008), plus 5 new Soros QA questions at L3/L4/L7/L8. Web-corpus truncation remediation is deferred to v1.0. 

11.6 Living-investor career boundaries and test-set contamination. Two distinct issues affect living-investor data integrity. (a) Test-set contamination from post-cutoff writings : 2024–2026 Buffett letters, Marks memos, etc. may appear in training corpora of models evaluated in v1.0. L7/L8 scenario-application questions are most vulnerable. Contamination detection [Dong et al., 2024] will be applied to all living-investor questions before final test-set evaluation. (b) Career-boundary attribution risk (v0.5 fix) :investors whose institutional role ended during the corpus window risk having post-departure independent commentary attributed to the canonical institutional framework. The v0.5 release introduces data/curation/ investor_career_boundaries_v01.json and scripts/corpus_filter.py to enforce per-investor temporal filtering at Phase 1/Phase 2 generation time. Concretely, Ray Dalio stepped down as Bridgewater co-CIO in October 2022; 14 post-2022 YouTube transcripts (50% of his usable transcript corpus) and 30 post-2022 Bridgewater institutional research pages (CIOs Karen Karniol-Tambour, Bob Prince; CEO Nir Bar Dea) were excluded from the v0.5 QA generation pipeline. Six Dalio QA items ( IPB-L2-RAY-064 , L3-RAY-090 , L4-RAY-119 , L5-RAY-149 , L6-RAY-176 , L8-RAY-219 ) whose original corpus_evidence cited the post-2022 “Modern Mercantilism” Bridgewater research series were regenerated with pre-2022 corpus only; full audit in data/ curation/dalio_contamination_audit_v01.json . Analogous boundaries are recorded for Charlie Munger (death 2023-11-28; hard exclude), Benjamin Graham (death 1976-09-21; soft filter as posthumous_secondary_ commentary since all YouTube content for Graham is necessarily post-mortem audiobook/summary), Peter Lynch (Magellan retirement 1990; soft filter), and George Soros (Quantum Fund → family office transition 2011; soft filter). 

11.7 Philip Fisher handling. Fisher remains excluded from the canonical primary-investor set due to insufficient scrape-native corpus grounding, but legacy references still appear in a small number of comparison questions. We explicitly flag and review those instances through the generated data-quality review queue. 

11.8 GRP and GRA reliability. Gold Reasoning Programs (GRPs) for the 243 v0.6 questions were constructed by a single annotator. Inter-annotator κ has not yet been estimated for the v1.0 set (estimated at κ≈0.72 on the 20-question pilot). The release also contains heterogeneous GRP coverage: 154/243 questions include gold_program , but many lower-layer programs are single- or two-gate checks rather than full procedural sequences. The multi-gate procedural claims therefore depend on the L4/L7 and ≥3-gate subset, and v1.0 will report coverage stratified by layer, gate count, and topology. GRA itself has not yet been independently human-aligned at the per-gate level; the planned reliability study will score name_match, normalized verdict_match, required-elements coverage, and aggregate GRA against dual-human labels before GRA thresholds are treated as calibrated operating points. 

11.9 BASP composite weight justification. The layer-adaptive composite weights are those specified in §7.13 (e.g., L4: 0.40 ·OGRS k + 0.35 ·KCCS + 0.25 ·SAP@2); they were set by expert judgment rather than estimated from data. Optimal weights estimated from human-validated data are a planned analysis once the 52 100-item gold set (§11.3) is complete. Note on BASP semantics : the composite is a weighted average , not a strict conjunction of pass/fail gates. A response with strong gate reconstruction (e.g., OGRS=1.0) can still achieve a non-trivial composite ( ≈0.35) even when individual sub-metrics are weak (e.g., KCCS=0.0). This means BASP can understate failure severity when a single dimension is decision-critical — most notably total kill-criterion omission, which warrants direct inspection of KCCS in addition to the composite. Interpretation of BASP scores should always include the five-dimension breakdown rather than the composite alone (the radar-chart convention used in §D.2). BASP-strict (§7.15, §11.12) is the conjunction variant that addresses this limitation directly. 

11.10 Framework topology metadata (v0.5). Prior versions of this paper (Table 4) ascribed linear_ sequential , parallel_threshold , and conditional_branch topologies to specific frameworks based on author judgment, but the underlying framework cards ( decision_frameworks_v04.json ) did not encode these declarations as data — every card had topology_type: null . The v0.5 release migrates all 25 frame-work cards to decision_frameworks_v05.json with explicit topology_type , gate_logic (conjunction /

disjunction / weighted_threshold_n_of_m / regime_dependent ), and topology_rationale fields. Dis-tribution across 25 cards: 15 linear_sequential , 6 parallel_threshold , 4 conditional_branch . Gate logic: 17 conjunction, 4 regime-dependent, 2 weighted-threshold-3-of-5 (Munger opportunity-evaluation lenses; Marks risk-assessment lenses), 1 weighted-threshold-4-of-7 (Dalio bubble-detection indicators), 1 disjunction (Lynch portfolio-monitoring sell triggers). This makes the paper’s topology claims independently verifiable from the data artifacts. 

11.11 Weighted and compensatory human judgment. GRA deliberately models a framework as a sequence of gates, but many investors apply criteria with tacit weights. A strongly favorable management assessment, unusually large margin of safety, or rare reflexive asymmetry may make a practitioner tolerate weaknesses that the extracted framework represents as separate gates. Conversely, a formally non-terminal concern may dominate the real decision in a specific market regime. These compensatory judgments are difficult to recover from books and interviews because investors often narrate the final decision after the fact rather than reveal the latent weighting function used at the moment of commitment. GRA is therefore strongest for explicit checklists, hard exclusions, and documented threshold rules; it is weaker for discretionary weighing, position sizing under uncertainty, and cases where one criterion overrides another without a textual kill rule. v1.0 will mark such frameworks with gate_logic = weighted_threshold_* or regime_ dependent and report GRA by topology so readers can distinguish checklist fidelity from discretionary judgment reconstruction. 

11.12 Ceiling effect under Condition A and BASP-strict discriminability. The primary sanity-wave results (§8.7) raise a ceiling concern: Claude Sonnet 4.6 achieves BASP-composite 0.906 overall with near-ceiling L5=0.967 and L6=0.961, so future frontier models may cluster above 0.90 under Condition A and lose inter-model discriminative power. Three structural mitigations are in place. (1) Multi-condition design : the primary comparison metric for frontier models is the set of condition deltas (Condition B −

A, Condition C − A, and B − C), testing whether models can use supplied context rather than rely on pretraining recall — and, per the §8.3 pilot, distinguishing targeted retrieval (B) from full-source injection (C), which the composite alone cannot. (2) Failure-mode profiling : a model can score 0.93 composite while still exhibiting FM-3 (Kill Criterion Omission) in 6% of responses — this fine-grained failure signal is invisible in the composite alone. (3) BASP-strict with GRA : the conjunction variant (§7.15) imposes per-metric pass/fail gates and FM-driven automatic gate failures, and the GRA sixth gate tightens the metric for L4/L7 questions. The operative evidence is the composite-vs-GRA divergence reported in §8.7 :BASP-composite spans 29.6 pp across the three stronger respondents (including the cost-efficient Gemini Flash Lite) while L4 GRA is flat within 0.6 pp — i.e., the composite saturates at the frontier while GRA still discriminates and exposes the residual gate-reconstruction gap. BASP-strict thresholds are calibrated by theoretical reasoning in v0.6; the human gold set (§11.3) confirms the composite tracks expert judgment (r = 0.72), and precision-oriented recalibration of the BASP-strict / FMDP operating points against the expert labels is a v1.0 item. 

Investor selection and corpus asymmetry (curated summary). The canonical v0.6 manifest tracks 25 

core framework cards (with explicit topology metadata), 118 core principle cards, and 243 QA questions (197 dev / 46 test) across the primary investor set, with adjacent/held-out items stored in curation appendices. 53 Coverage remains Western- and equity-centric; see §12 for impersonation risk associated with the 6 living investors. The distinctive phrase profile (Table 8) summarizes lexical signatures (e.g., Buffett: “circle of competence” / “owner earnings”; Marks: “pendulum” / “second-level thinking”; Soros: “reflexivity”) that inform FM-4 (Voice Diffusion) detection baselines. 

# 12. Broader Impact 

Institutional relevance. InvestPhilBench measures a practically important capability gap: as LLMs are deployed in institutional investment analysis (portfolio screening, due-diligence memos, client advisory), the ability to correctly reconstruct and apply an investor’s decision framework — including its kill criteria and conditional branch logic — materially affects downstream decisions. The benchmark provides infrastructure for financial institutions to evaluate this capability before deployment. 

Living-investor impersonation risk. The benchmark includes living and deceased investors; this creates a non-trivial impersonation risk if benchmark artifacts are repurposed as persona fine-tuning data. We therefore frame all QA prompts as historical framework reconstruction and retain explicit source provenance fields. We implement three structural mitigations. First, the Principle Knowledge Base (PKB) contains only 

documented historical decisions and explicitly sourced canonical quotes — all principle cards carry a source field identifying the originating document and date; no principle is derived from inference about current or future views. Second, all QA questions are explicitly framed as historical procedural reconstruction (“how did Marks evaluate X in 2008”) rather than solicitation of current opinion. Third, the dataset is released under CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0 , which prohibits use for commercial fine-tuning of persona chatbots and requires attribution; the license is noted in the README and DATA_CARD.md .

Equity and coverage asymmetry. The corpus is Western- and equity-centric: all nine investors operate primarily in US public equity or credit markets. Alternative-asset, fixed-income, emerging-market, and non-English-language investment philosophies are absent. We flag this limitation explicitly in §11 and in the data card. Future expansion should prioritise non-Western investors and alternative-asset frameworks to avoid entrenching a narrowly Anglo-American conception of investment excellence as the evaluation standard. 

Misuse risk summary. The primary misuse vectors are: (1) persona impersonation of living investors; (2) use of benchmark QA as fine-tuning signal to create authoritative-seeming investment advisors; (3) selective citation of BASP scores to make models appear competent at investment reasoning without disclosing benchmark limitations. Mitigations (1)–(2) are structural per above; mitigation (3) relies on the benchmark community norm of full experimental reporting, which the paper models by reporting confidence intervals and failure-mode prevalence alongside headline BASP scores. 

# 13. Conclusion 

InvestPhilBench closes two gaps simultaneously: no benchmark had tested LLMs on expert investor procedural frameworks, and no financial NLP benchmark had proposed a fully automated quantitative scoring pipeline for open-ended philosophical reasoning. Situated against the broader financial NLP landscape, InvestPhilBench surfaces a procedural deficit that takes two forms across model generations. In the v0.1 pilot of earlier models it appears as a 16pp L3 →L4 BASP-composite cliff (§8.2); at the current frontier the composite saturates (Claude Sonnet 4.6 L4=0.932) and the same deficit re-surfaces only under the gate-level GRA metric (frontier L4 GRA ~0.77, L7 GRA 0.57– 0.62; §8.7). The methodological headline of this release is therefore the composite-vs-GRA divergence :composite scoring rewards fluent prose and hides the procedural gap, while GRA isolates it. This parallels FinQA’s ~30pp expert–model gap on reasoning programs [Chen et al., 2021] and extends FinanceBench’s oracle-condition insight [Islam et al., 2023] to procedural philosophical reasoning. In the pilot, the BASP metrics further sharpen the diagnosis: OGRS k (0.41–0.67) lower than τ (0.41–0.74) reveals the previously invisible coverage component of procedural failure; KCCS (0.38–0.63) identifies kill criterion omission as 54 the specific procedural knowledge gap. The corrected three-condition pipeline (§8.3) yields two pilot-scale 

observations (n=10, two cost-efficient models; to be confirmed at scale in v1.0) that, if they survive, would be novel relative to prior benchmarks: a residual application gap that persists even with the correct source in context, and a tendency for targeted PKB retrieval to outperform full-framework injection. We flag these as directional rather than established; the value delivered here is the corrected, reproducible three-condition machinery, not the small-sample ordering. Three findings are particularly actionable. First, FM-2 is addressable by RAG: the systematic 1986 →1990 year error is a corpus artifact that targeted PKB retrieval eliminates. Second, the non-trivial Application Gap (Table 14) requires Framework-Aware prompting: instructing models to state kill criteria explicitly per gate (not just gate verdicts) can close the KCCS gap. Third, framework structure type directly predicts τ

reconstruction difficulty — the Dalio conditional-branch evidence, formalized in the §7.14 metric adaptation framework, provides an immediate evaluation design principle for v1.0. All data, annotation schemas, gold reasoning programs, and evaluation code are released publicly. As LLMs become embedded in institutional financial analysis, InvestPhilBench and BASP together provide the evaluation infrastructure to distinguish genuine procedural understanding from pattern-matched retrieval — a distinction on which the safe and effective deployment of these systems materially depends. 

# Data Availability 

Canonical release note (manuscript synchronized to data v0.6): This draft is synchronized to InvestPhilBench/data/qa_benchmark/questions_v04.json , with split policy (197 dev / 46 test; seed 20260420). Current reviewer-resolved core coverage is 118 principles, 25 frameworks (with explicit 

topology_type + gate_logic metadata), and 243 QA questions. v0.6 changes from v0.5: (a) GRA metric implemented inline in run_phase4_evaluate.py and retroactively applied to all 4 sanity-wave eval files via run_gra_eval.py ; (b) 8 expert-difficulty L4 hard questions ( IPB-L4H-GRA-001 through IPB-L4H-GRA-008 ) hand-authored targeting discovered GRA failure patterns; (c) splits regenerated for 243-question set (questions_v04_dev.json , questions_v04_test.json ); (d) sanity-wave W1 complete: Claude Sonnet 4.6 (188Q), GPT-5.5 (188Q), Gemini Flash Lite (180Q valid), Gemini 3.5 Flash (188Q) all evaluated under Condition A. Eval files: eval_v02_claude-sonnet-4-6-or_closed_dev_20260518_2126.json , eval_ v02_gemini-3.1-flash-lite-preview_closed_dev_20260518_1959.json , eval_v02_gpt-5.5_closed_ dev_20260524_1443.json , eval_v02_gemini-3.5-flash_closed_dev_20260524_1221.json . Prior v0.5 artifacts remain at questions_v03.json (235Q), questions_v03_dev.json (188Q), questions_v03_ test.json (47Q). v0.6 evaluation-pipeline corrections (folded in for this revision; full multi-model run deferred to v1.0): (e) Conditions B/C reimplemented as true model-in-the-loop settings — Condition B retrieves the top-3 PKB cards via embedding similarity ( text-embedding-3-large through OpenRouter) and Condition C injects the ground-truth-keyed framework/principle cards ( oracle_context matches 

gold_program.framework by id or name); (f) a single unified judge (gemini-3.1-pro ) replaces the W1 mixed-judge assignment, with judge-call JSON-robustness hardening ( JUDGE_MAX_TOKENS + retry; §7.5); (g) a layer-stratified 10-question smoke split ( questions_v04_devpilot.json ) and the corrected three-condition validation pilot ( results/eval_v03_*_devpilot_*.json , summarized in results/pilot_v03_review.md ); superseded/quarantined runs are under results/archive/ . These changes are in InvestPhilBench/ scripts/run_phase4_evaluate.py and aggregate_wave_results.py .The PKB primary-source corpus underlying Table 7 — 177 web documents and 258 YouTube interview transcripts with full provenance metadata ( url or video_id , dates, word counts, scraped_at timestamps) — is released with the FinanceBench project repository. Per-investor career boundaries are enforced at Phase 1/Phase 2 generation time by InvestPhilBench/scripts/corpus_filter.py against InvestPhilBench/ data/curation/investor_career_boundaries_v01.json . The following data artifacts are included: 

• data/web_content/ : Per-investor JSON files with scraped written documents (9 investors, 394,610 words; Dalio docs annotated with published_year v0.5) 

• data/youtube_interviews/ : Per-investor JSON files with YouTube metadata and transcripts (9 investors, 1,276,151 words) 55 • data/youtube_interviews/archive/ray_dalio_post_bridgewater_*.json : 14 post-2022-12-31 Dalio transcripts preserved for v1.0 research but excluded from the v0.5 benchmark 

• InvestPhilBench/data/principles/principle_knowledge_base_v05.json : Reviewer-resolved core Principle Knowledge Base — 118 investment principle cards (113 from v04 + 5 new Soros cards) 

• InvestPhilBench/data/frameworks/decision_frameworks_v05.json : Reviewer-resolved core deci-sion framework cards — 25 investment decision frameworks with topology_type / gate_logic /

topology_rationale fields 

• InvestPhilBench/data/qa_benchmark/questions_v04.json : Canonical full QA dataset (243 ques-tions, L1–L8; includes 8 expert-difficulty L4H hard questions) 

• InvestPhilBench/data/qa_benchmark/questions_v04_dev.json : Development split (197 questions; seed 20260420) 

• InvestPhilBench/data/qa_benchmark/questions_v04_test.json : Held-out test split (46 questions; evaluated exactly once per model after dev-set tuning is frozen) 

• InvestPhilBench/data/qa_benchmark/questions_v03.json : Prior v0.5 full dataset (235 questions; preserved for reproducibility) 

• InvestPhilBench/data/qa_benchmark/questions_v03_hard.json : Staging file for 8 hard questions (merged into v04) 

• InvestPhilBench/data/curation/investor_career_boundaries_v01.json : Per-investor institu-tional career boundaries enforced by the filter pipeline 

• InvestPhilBench/data/curation/dalio_contamination_audit_v01.json : Audit of Dalio QA items flagged for post-Bridgewater corpus contamination (input to v0.5 regeneration) 

• InvestPhilBench/results/human_gold_calibration_v01.json : 100-item expert human-gold cali-bration — per-record human/automated/LLM-rater labels and human ↔automated agreement statistics (§11.3) 

• InvestPhilBench/data/qa_benchmark/human_gold_build/ : human-gold annotation workspace — the expert-annotated reference ( human_gold_annotator_final.csv ), the disclosed Claude-v2 LLM-rater arm ( human_gold_llm_rater_claude_v2.csv ), the annotator guide/manual, blinded templates, and row →model key 

• InvestPhilBench/scripts/build_human_gold_sheet.py , scripts/score_human_gold_final.py :human-gold sampling and human ↔automated agreement-scoring tooling (§11.3) 

• InvestPhilBench/results/summary_v02_*.json : per-model BASP aggregates (Tables 11, 12, 13, 16, 17) for the four W1 sanity-wave models 

• InvestPhilBench/results/eval_v02_*.json : Full per-question evaluation results by model (legacy v0.4.1; v0.5 reruns pending) 

• InvestPhilBench/results/summary_v02_*.json : Aggregated BASP by layer and investor 

• InvestPhilBench/results/table9_fmdp_v02.json : FMDP precision/recall/F1 by failure mode Companion quantitative benchmark FinCalcBench (50 questions; data/questions_v03.json schema) is released in the same repository. Exact public URL and DOI will be listed at camera-ready; interim distribution follows the repository README.md . The release audit is reproducible via python InvestPhilBench/scripts/ reconcile_release_data.py and python InvestPhilBench/scripts/validate_data_integrity.py ;phase pipeline reproducibility remains available via python InvestPhilBench/scripts/run_all_ phases.py --dry-run .

# References 

1. Anderson, J.R. (1983). The Architecture of Cognition . Harvard University Press. 2. Anderson, L.W. & Krathwohl, D.R. (2001). A Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching, and Assessing .Longman. 3. Araci, D. (2019). FinBERT. arXiv:1908.10063 .4. Buffett, W.E. (1977–2023). Berkshire Hathaway Annual Shareholder Letters .5. Buffett, W.E. (1996). An Owner’s Manual . Berkshire Hathaway Inc. 6. Canada Pension Plan Investment Board. (2018–2024). Annual Reports and Investment Framework .56 7. Canada Pension Plan Investment Board. (2024). Our Investment Strategy: Total Portfolio Approach and the Factor Lens. CPP Investments. https://www.cppinvestments.com/the-fund/how-we-invest/ 8. Chen, Z., et al. (2021). FinQA: A Dataset of Numerical Reasoning over Financial Data. EMNLP 2021 .[Execution acc: expert 91.16%, FinQANet 61.24%] 9. Dalio, R. (2013). How the Economic Machine Works . Bridgewater Associates. 10. Dalio, R. (2017). Principles: Life and Work . Simon & Schuster. 11. Dalio, R. (2018). Principles for Navigating Big Debt Crises . Bridgewater Associates. 12. Dalio, R. (2021). Principles for Dealing with the Changing World Order . Simon & Schuster. 13. Dong, Y., et al. (2024). Generalization or Memorization: Data Contamination and Trustworthy Evaluation for Large Language Models. ACL 2024 Findings ; arXiv:2402.15938 .14. Fabbri, A.R., et al. (2021). SummEval: Re-evaluating Summarization Evaluation. TACL , 9. 15. Fisher, P.A. (1958). Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits . Harper & Brothers. 16. Graham, B. (1949/1973). The Intelligent Investor . Harper & Row. 17. Graham, B. & Dodd, D. (1934). Security Analysis . Whittlesey House. 18. Greenblatt, J. (1997). You Can Be a Stock Market Genius . Simon & Schuster. 19. Guha, N., et al. (2023). LegalBench. NeurIPS 2023 .20. Hendrycks, D., et al. (2021). MMLU. ICLR 2021 .21. Islam, P., et al. (2023). FinanceBench. arXiv:2311.11944 . [10,231Q; GPT-4-Turbo 11% closed-book, ~19% with retrieval] 22. Jin, D., et al. (2021). MedQA. Applied Sciences , 11(14). 23. Kim, A.G., Muhn, M., & Nikolaev, V.V. (2024). Financial Statement Analysis with Large Language Models. University of Chicago Booth Working Paper; SSRN 4762860 (arXiv:2407.17866, withdrawn pending data review). 24. Klarman, S.A. (1991). Margin of Safety . HarperCollins. 25. Kojima, T., et al. (2022). Large Language Models are Zero-Shot Reasoners. NeurIPS 2022 .26. Lewis, P., et al. (2020). Retrieval-Augmented Generation. NeurIPS 2020 .27. Liang, P., et al. (2023). HELM: Holistic Evaluation of Language Models. TMLR .28. Lightman, H., Kosaraju, V., Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Baker, B., Lee, T., Leike, J., Schulman, J., Sutskever, I., & Cobbe, K. (2024). Let’s Verify Step by Step. ICLR 2024 ; arXiv:2305.20050 .29. Lin, S., Hilton, J., & Evans, O. (2022). TruthfulQA. ACL 2022 .30. Liu, N., et al. (2024). Lost in the Middle. TACL , 12, 157–173. 31. Liu, Y., et al. (2023). G-Eval: NLG Evaluation using GPT-4 with Better Human Alignment. EMNLP 2023 .32. Wang, W., et al. (2026). Intelligence Degradation in Long-Context LLMs: Critical Threshold Determi-nation via Natural Length Distribution Analysis. arXiv:2601.15300 .33. Ramezanali, M., Vazifeh, M., & Santi, P. (2025). seqBench: A Tunable Benchmark to Quantify Sequential Reasoning Limits of LLMs. EMNLP 2025 , pp. 33771–33792; arXiv:2509.16866 .34. Lopez-Lira, A. & Tang, Y. (2023). Can ChatGPT Forecast Stock Price Movements? arXiv:2304.07619 .35. Lynch, P. & Rothchild, J. (1989). One Up on Wall Street . Simon & Schuster. 36. Lynch, P. & Rothchild, J. (1993). Beating the Street . Simon & Schuster. 37. Malo, P., et al. (2014). Good Debt or Bad Debt. JASIST , 65(4). 38. Marks, H. (2011). The Most Important Thing . Columbia University Press. 39. Marks, H. (2018). Mastering the Market Cycle . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. 40. Marks, H. (2023, July). Taking the Temperature. Oaktree Capital Memo .41. Marks, H. (2024, January). Easy Money. Oaktree Capital Memo .42. Marks, H. (2025, November). Cockroaches in the Coal Mine. Oaktree Capital Memo .43. Munger, C.T. (1994). A Lesson on Elementary, Worldly Wisdom. USC Business School Speech .44. Norges Bank Investment Management. (2020–2024). Annual Reports and Responsible Investment Reports .45. Council on Ethics for the Norwegian Government Pension Fund Global. (2023). Annual Report 2023 .Norwegian Ministry of Finance. 46. Norway Ministry of Finance. (2005, amended 2021). Government Pension Fund Act .47. Pal, A., et al. (2022). MedMCQA. CHIL 2022 .48. Public Investment Fund. (2021). Santiago Principles Self-Assessment Report .57 49. Ribeiro, M.T., et al. (2020). Beyond Accuracy: Behavioral Testing with CheckList. ACL 2020 (Best Paper Award). 50. Saudipedia / Public Investment Fund. (2024). PIF Strategy .51. Shi, F., et al. (2023). LLMs Can Be Easily Distracted by Irrelevant Context. ICML 2023 .52. Soros, G. (1987). The Alchemy of Finance . Simon & Schuster. 53. Soros, G. (1995). Soros on Soros . Wiley. 54. Li, H., et al. (2025). INVESTORBENCH: A Benchmark for Financial Decision-Making Tasks with LLM-based Agent. ACL 2025 , pp. 2509–2525; arXiv:2412.18174 . [13 LLMs; stocks/crypto/ETF; agent decision-making] 55. Wei, J., et al. (2022). Chain-of-Thought Prompting. NeurIPS 2022 .56. Wu, S., et al. (2023). BloombergGPT. arXiv:2303.17564 .57. Xie, Q., et al. (2023). PIXIU: A Comprehensive Benchmark, Instruction Dataset and Large Language Model for Finance. NeurIPS 2023 .58. Zha, Y., et al. (2023). AlignScore: Evaluating Factual Consistency. ACL 2023 .59. Zhang, H., et al. (2025). FinCalcBench: A Benchmark for Financial Calculation and Expert-Level Quantitative Reasoning. Companion benchmark (v0.3; 50 questions); released with FinanceBench repository — see Data Availability. (No separate arXiv preprint at time of submission.) 60. Zhang, T., et al. (2020). BERTScore: Evaluating Text Generation with BERT. ICLR 2020 .61. Zhang, Z., et al. (2025). XFinBench: Benchmarking LLMs in Complex Financial Problem Solving and Reasoning. ACL 2025 Findings; arXiv:2508.15861 . [4,235Q; 5 capabilities; o1 67.3% vs human ~80%] 62. Chen, Z. (Zhiyu), et al. (2022). ConvFinQA: Exploring the Chain of Numerical Reasoning in Conversa-tional Finance Question Answering. EMNLP 2022 ; arXiv:2210.03849 .63. Zhu, F., Lei, W., Wang, C., Zheng, J., Lv, S., Feng, F., & Chua, T.-S. (2021). TAT-QA: A Question Answering Benchmark on a Hybrid of Tabular and Textual Content in Finance. ACL 2021 , pp. 3277– 3287. 64. Chen, S., et al. (2025). Benchmarking Large Language Models Under Data Contamination: A Survey from Static to Dynamic Evaluation. EMNLP 2025 Main; arXiv:2502.17521 .

# Appendix A: Representative Questions by Layer 

A.1 Layer 3 (Operationalization) — Medium 

IPB-P-003 : “Buffett’s concept of ‘owner earnings’ differs from reported net income. Explain the formula, why Buffett prefers it over EPS, and what it implies for capital-intensive vs. capital-light businesses.” 

Ground-truth elements: (1) formula: net income + D&A − maintenance capex; (2) capital-light implication (owner earnings ≥ reported); (3) capital-heavy implication (owner earnings ≪ reported); (4) source: Berkshire Letter, 1986 (investor-stated) . Canonical errors: equating owner earnings with FCF (FM-5, Operationalization Flattening); citing the 1990 letter (FM-2, Temporal Conflation — the cross-model year error of §9). 

A.2 Layer 7 (Scenario Application) — Hard (the worked GRP of §6.3) 

IPB-P-011 : “A technology company: 90% gross margins, 95% retention, 25% growth, zero net income, $5B ARR, trading at 10 × ARR. Apply Buffett’s acquisition checklist, stating the verdict at each gate.” Investment verdict: DECLINE.  

> Gate

Outcome Key reasoning 1: Circle of Competence PROCEED Subscription economics measurable; 95% retention quantifies switching cost; within defined competence 2: Economic Moat PROCEED 95% retention + 90% GM → switching costs + pricing power 58 Gate Outcome Key reasoning 3: Management Integrity INCONCLUSIVE Management data not provided; no kill criterion triggered; analysis continues 4: Intrinsic Value ≈$25B Owner earnings at maturity ≈$1.25B; ~20 × →≈$25B 5: Margin of Safety REJECT Price $50B (10 × $5B ARR) vs. intrinsic ≈$25B; kill criterion triggered ( ≈2× premium) 6: Holding Period N/A Gate 5 REJECT terminates the chain 

Scoring note: Gate 3 INCONCLUSIVE scores 1.0 when the model correctly identifies data insufficiency; 0.5 for a PROCEED/REJECT that explicitly acknowledges the data gap; 0.0 for a PROCEED/REJECT that does not (§7.3). This is the same gold program scored by GRA in §8.7. 

A.3 Layer 8 (Novel Extrapolation) — Expert 

IPB-P-019 : “A central bank announces a CBDC reducing commercial banks’ credit-creation role. How would Buffett, Dalio, and Soros each analyze this?” 

• Buffett: circle-of-competence filter → CBDC outside circle; focuses on existing bank holdings’ moat-erosion risk; would not speculate on the CBDC itself. 

• Dalio: economic-machine lens → CBDC enables negative rates without cash hoarding → higher debasement risk → gold / hard assets. 

• Soros: identifies which reflexive loop activates (credit contraction vs. expansion); takes a small pilot position; monitors bank stocks and credit creation as the hypothesis test. 

Canonical L8 failure: FM-4 (Voice Diffusion, persona-inversion subtype) — pilot models swapped the Buffett and Dalio framings under maximum cognitive load (§9). 

# Appendix B: Dataset Statistics 

Table B.1: Dataset Summary (v0.6 canonical vs. v1.0 target)  

> Component

v0.1 pilot v0.6 canonical v1.0 target Principle cards 33 118 150 Framework cards (individual practitioner) 15 25 25 Framework cards (institutional, prose-only) 3 3 (not yet encoded; §5.3) 8 (encoded) QA questions 20 243 (197 dev / 46 test) 300 Individual investors 9 9 25 Institutional asset owners 3 3 (illustrative) 8

Table B.2: Source Document Types (v0.6 released corpus)  

> Type

Count Examples Investor web documents (Tier 1/3/5) 177 docs / 394,610 words Berkshire letters 2004–2024, Oaktree memos, Bridgewater Research, Soros essays 59 Type Count Examples YouTube interview transcripts (Tier 4) 258 transcripts / 1,276,151 words Long-form first-person interviews, English, 

≥200 words each Institutional strategy documents (Tier 2, prose-only) — NBIM annual / Council-on-Ethics reports, CPPIB Total Portfolio Approach, PIF Santiago Principles 

# Appendix C: Benchmark Comparison Detail 

Table C.1: Extended Comparison 

60 Feature  FinQA  FinanceBench  INVESTORBENCH  XFinBench  IPB v0.6  IPB v1.0 (target) 

> Questions  8,281  150 (open)  ~300  4,235  243  300 Primary-source verified
> × ✓ (SEC)  × × ✓ ✓
> Investor-specific frameworks
> × × × × ✓ ✓
> Gold reasoning programs (dual accuracy)
> ✓ × × × ✓ (L4/L7)  ✓
> Non-linear framework topology metadata
> × × × × ✓ (Table 5)  ✓
> Compound / multi-kill criteria
> × × × × ✓ (CKCA)  ✓ (encoded) Per-gate procedural metric (GRA) program acc.
> × × × ✓ ✓

61 Appendix D: BASP Metric Reference Summary 

Table D.1: BASP Sub-Metric Reference  

> Metric

What it measures Range Primary layers Composite role OGRS / OGRS k

(§7.6) Coverage-weighted gate-sequence reconstruction (GCF ×

normalized τ ; kill-gate weighting) [0,1] L4, L7 0.35–0.40 weight KCCS (§7.7) F1 coverage of kill-criterion elements 

[0,1] L4, L7 0.30–0.35 weight SAP@k (§7.8) Source-attribution precision at entity/document/context level [0,1] L1–L3 0.20–0.40 weight IVP / SDI (§7.9) Investor-voice distinctness vs. other investors [0,1] L5, L8 0.10–0.50 weight CKCA (§7.10) Which compound kill-criterion component triggered REJECT [0,1] institutional additive diagnostic GRA (§7.15) Per-gate name + verdict-type + required-elements match [0,1] L4, L7 6th BASP-strict gate 

Table D.2: Reporting Conventions. Because no single metric is reliable across all dimensions (SummEval; HELM, §2.3), BASP is always reported as the five-dimension profile rather than the composite alone. The recommended visualization is a per-model radar over {OGRS k, KCCS, SAP@k, IVP, CKCA} with the FMDP flag-rate vector (Table 16) as an inset; the composite is a weighted average of these axes (§7.13) and, per the §11.9 caveat, can mask a decision-critical single-axis failure (e.g. total kill-criterion omission). For frontier procedural-reasoning claims, GRA (§8.7) is reported alongside the composite as the metric of record. 

# Appendix E: Gold Reasoning Program Format Specification 

Table E.1: GRP Field Definitions  

> Field

Type Description Scoring Use 

gate int Gate number (1-indexed) OGRS gate ordering 

name string Gate name matching framework card OGRS coverage (GCF) 

verdict enum PROCEED / REJECT / INCONCLUSIVE VerdictAcc per gate 

kill_criterion string or null Kill condition label (null if none) KCCS element detection 

required_ elements 

list[string] Elements required for full credit KCCS F1 denominator 

kill_triggered bool Whether kill criterion fires CKCA for institutional 

computed_value string or null Numerical computation (e.g., intrinsic value) Partial-credit rubric 

Table E.2: GRP Inter-Annotator Agreement (v0.1) 

62 Field Cohen’s κ n Notes Gate verdict (PRO-CEED/REJECT/INCONCLUSIVE) 0.86 20Q × 6avg gates = 120 Consistent with FinQA program annotation standards Kill criterion identification 0.78 45 kill-criterion gates Lower than verdict κ;conceptual kill elements harder to bound Required element set 0.73 45 kill-criterion gates Set-level F1 agreement Investment verdict (INVEST/DECLINE) 0.91 20Q Near-deterministic given gate verdicts 

# Appendix F: Principle ID Reference Glossary 

Earlier working documents and legacy review correspondence used shorthand codes (e.g., BUF-P07 , GRA-P04 , DAL-P03 ) to compactly cite documented contradictions and cross-investor tensions. These codes were vestigial from the v0.1/v0.2 PKB schema and were never operationalized in the released data, which uses 

<investor>_<concept>_<NNN> IDs (e.g., buffett_moat_001 ). The paper body uses descriptive phrases inline; this appendix preserves the mapping for readers of legacy correspondence. 

Table F.1: Legacy shorthand → v05 canonical principle_id mapping  

> Legacy code

Type Canonical principle_id(s) One-line summary Primary source 

BUF-P04 principle (margin of safety) 

buffett_ intrinsic_value_ 001 

Margin of safety operationalized as price below intrinsic value (owner-earnings DCF), not Graham’s mechanical net-net Berkshire Annual Letter 1988; An Owner’s Manual 

1996 

BUF-P06 principle (sentiment) 

buffett_fearful_ greedy_001 

Be fearful when others are greedy; reactive sentiment signal as secondary valuation input Berkshire Annual Letter 2006 

BUF-P07 contradiction (airline reversal) 

buffett_circle_ of_competence_ 001 + buffett_ moat_001 jointly Documented airline reversal 2001 →

2016 → 2020; canonical FM-4 test case Terry College Speech 2001 (YT 

2a9Lx9J8uSs ); Berkshire Letters 2016–2019; 2021 pandemic-exit video (YT 

uh5MgS9_roA )

GRA-P01 principle (margin of safety) 

graham_margin_ 001 

Two-thirds-of-NAV operationalization; mechanical asset-liquidation screen 

The Intelligent Investor 1949, Ch. 20 63 Legacy code Type Canonical principle_id(s) One-line summary Primary source 

GRA-P04 contradiction (Buffett’s net-net abandonment) 

graham_net_net_ 001 + reference to Buffett’s 1965+ shift Buffett’s abandonment of Graham’s net-net screen post-1965 Graham Intelligent Investor ; Buffett Berkshire Letters 1965–1969 

DAL-P03 principle (cash and defensive positioning) 

dalio_economic_ machine_001 +

dalio_regime_ positioning_001 

2013 cash-as-transactional-medium framing vs. 2020–2022 defensive positioning; all pre-departure 

How the Economic Machine Works 

2013; Principles for Navigating Big Debt Crises 2018; 

Principles for Dealing with the Changing World Order 2021 

MAR-P01 principle (pendulum vs. fearful/greedy) 

marks_pendulum_ 001 

Active pendulum-temperature monitoring framework; mechanistically distinct from Buffett’s reactive sentiment signal 

The Most Important Thing 

2011, Ch. 9; Oaktree memo “Taking the Temperature” 2023 

SOR-* (no legacy codes used in paper body for Soros) n/a The v0.5 Soros expansion added 

soros_currency_ speculation_001 ,

soros_macro_ thematic_ positioning_001 ,

soros_two_way_ feedback_loop_ 001 , soros_boom_ bust_phases_ detailed_001 ,

soros_ asymmetric_bet_ sizing_001 

The Alchemy of Finance 1987; 

Soros on Soros 

1995 

Note on contradictions vs. principles. Several legacy codes (notably BUF-P07 , GRA-P04 ) referenced 

contradictions (tensions between investor positions or temporal evolution within one investor) rather than standalone principles. In the released data these are encoded as contradictions_or_tensions fields on related principle cards rather than as standalone IDs. Where the paper body refers to a contradiction, it cites both the canonical principle_id(s) involved and the contradiction context inline. 64